---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 24.02.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2024/2/24.02.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Water Flow Connection : Discover Your Relationship with Water through  S.T.E.A.M"
unitAuthor: "Stephanie Smelser"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: ""
---
<main>
        <p>The goal of the unit of study is to combine the domains of Science, Technology, Art, and Math to raise both Science awareness as well as overall mindfulness to Water, Flow, and Connection. The other goal of this unit of study is for the heart to get connected, to allow students the opportunity to make their own relationship or friendship with water through their own personal inquiry and creativity. I want students to research water independently, with a group, or a peer, only to find their own personal heart connection or friendship with water, that then inspires a powerful water google slide show presentation and amazing water related work of art.</p>
<p>Water is everywhere in nature yet water is a resource many take for granted.</p>
<p>Technology has been designed and developed to help human connections yet it appears that humanity is less connected than ever before. Technology supports science, yet it also appears that our earth needs support, especially our water as a resource, that needs our attention. I ask is our technology supporting water resource issue? I wonder what is my relationship or friendship with water and I wonder what relationship are other people having with water?</p>
<p>This unit of study invites students to consider their own relationship with water through the lens of the S.T.E.A.M disciplines.</p>
<p>(Developed for S.T.E.A.M., Art, and Water, grade 5; recommended for Art, Science, S.T.E.A.M., and Water, grades K-12)</p>
</main>
