---
layout: "unit"
title: "18.01.06: Income Inequality Control"
path: "/curriculum/units/2018/1/18.01.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "Income Inequality Control"
unitAuthor: "Aparna Shyam"
---
<main>
 <p>
  This unit is designed to strengthen high school students’ understanding of statistical concepts related to linear regression.  Many students report that in the past, they have not received enough opportunities in their mathematics classes to engage in peer-to-peer discourse about topics that are meaningful to them.  Rather, their mathematics courses have focused primarily on execution of algorithms.  By having students study linear regression in the context of income inequality, my aim is to show students that statistics can be open-ended.  More specifically, it can be used to analyze real-world problems and come up with solutions accordingly.  The main question students will investigate throughout the unit plan is, “Which factors contribute to the disparity in income among people of different income brackets and to what extent?”
 </p>
 <h1>
  <strong>
   Rationale
  </strong>
 </h1>
 <p>
  This interdisciplinary unit plan is intended for high school Statistics courses taught in New Haven Public Schools.  Many of the students I teach have low skill retention and will benefit from a review of graphing skills covered in the prerequisite courses for Statistics (Algebra 1, Geometry, and Algebra 2).  These graphing skills include providing a graph or chart with a descriptive title, labeling the axes of a coordinate plane with the appropriate scales and variables, plotting ordered pairs, using the slope and y-intercept of a linear function to graph a line on a coordinate plane, and determining the equation of a line in slope-intercept form given two points.  Students enrolled in Statistics classes are in eleventh or twelfth grade and are likely to encounter problems that require application of the aforementioned skills on the SAT.  In Statistics, students will also acquire new skills such as fitting a linear regression model to a scatterplot, using the correlation coefficient and coefficient of determination to assess the linearity of a scatterplot, and creating a plot of residuals to evaluate whether a linear model is a reasonable fit for the data.  These tasks will be simplified with technological tools like the TI-84 Plus graphing calculator and Desmos.
 </p>
 <p>
  While several of my students are capable of executing mathematical algorithms correctly, they often struggle to understand when and why we use them.  They have difficulty tackling questions that require them to justify their solution steps or interpret their answer in the context of the data.  This is why it might be helpful for them to learn linear regression concepts as they relate to a real-world issue – in this case, income inequality.  By facilitating discussions on the history of income inequality, the reasons for its existence, the factors that influence inequality levels in various countries, and ways to alleviate inequality, I will get to learn more about my students’ knowledge of topics beyond the realm of mathematics.  Perhaps this will give students who lack self-confidence in mathematics and shine in other subjects more opportunities for oral participation.  Income inequality is a topic that infuses statistics with history and social studies, two subjects that give students plenty of opportunities to share their personal opinions about world issues.
 </p>
 <p>
  A large number of my students come from low-income backgrounds or live in poor neighborhoods.  Their families, peers, or they themselves are likely to be affected by rising levels of income inequality.  Many of my students face immense pressure to achieve greater financial or educational success than their parents.  Therefore, it is expected that this unit will resonate with them, as the ultimate goal is for them to come up with policies to alleviate income inequality based on statistical findings.  Of course, there is no solution to income inequality that is universally agreed upon.  However, controversy can often generate discourse, which is typically a sign of engagement in the classroom.
 </p>
 <h1>
  <strong>
   Teaching Strategies and Objectives
  </strong>
 </h1>
 <p>
  By the end of the unit, students should be able to
 </p>
 <ul>
  <li>
   Interpret the slope of the linear regression model in the context of the data.
  </li>
  <li>
   Interpret the y-intercept of the linear regression model in the context of the data.
  </li>
  <li>
   Use the correlation coefficient for a scatterplot to describe the form, direction, and strength of the linear relationship between the explanatory and response variables.
  </li>
  <li>
   Use the coefficient of determination to determine the fraction of variation in the dependent variable that is explained by the independent variable.
  </li>
  <li>
   Understand that correlation does not imply causation.
  </li>
  <li>
   Create a residual plot for a bivariate data set and use the plot to determine whether a linear model is appropriate for the data.
  </li>
  <li>
   Use information from statistical analyses to come up with possible solutions to income inequality.
  </li>
 </ul>
 <p>
  In this unit, students will have the opportunity to explore the extent to which variables of their choosing correlate with the distribution of income in a location, whether a state or country.  They will acquire the data they need from resources like the World Inequality Database or the National Bureau of Labor Statistics.  Once they have analyzed their data, they will share their results with their peers.  By the end of the unit, they should be able to use their gathered data, research, and even personal convictions to formulate answers to the following questions:
 </p>
 <ol>
  <li>
   Do you believe that income inequality should exist to a certain degree? Why or why not?
  </li>
  <li>
   What are the ways in which income inequality can negatively impact our society?
  </li>
  <li>
   Which variables most strongly correlate with income inequality and why?
  </li>
  <li>
   Which variables do not seem to correlate strongly with income inequality?
  </li>
  <li>
   What are the consequences of income inequality for earners in all brackets?
  </li>
  <li>
   What are the public policies that have kept income inequality low in the countries or states with the lowest Gini coefficients?
  </li>
  <li>
   How can the United States reform public policies to close the gap between high-income and low-income earners?
  </li>
 </ol>
 <h1>
  <strong>
   Content and Background Information
  </strong>
 </h1>
 <h3>
  What is Income Inequality?
 </h3>
 <p>
  “Income” refers to money earned through employment, dividends, interest, capital gains, royalties, or transfer payments.  This unit plan will introduce students to income inequality, defined as the extent to which income is distributed unevenly among a population.  From 1947 to 1973, following World War II, the United States saw an increase in mean family income.  During this 26-year period, the annual rate of income growth for the bottom 20% of earners was greater than that of any other income bracket.  Since 1973, however, the share of income for individuals in the lowest quintile has decreased.  Data from 2015 shows that individuals in the top 1% of the United States average about forty times as much income as those in the bottom decile.
  <sup>
   1
  </sup>
  The top 1%’s share of income has more than doubled since the mid-twentieth century.  A summary statistic called the Gini index or Gini coefficient, has alerted economists to the fact that the level of income inequality is particularly high in the United States.  The Gini index is measured on a scale of 0 to 1, 0 being indicative of an egalitarian society and 1 implying that a single resident in a location has all the income.
  <sup>
   2
  </sup>
  The United States has a Gini coefficient of .42, which is much higher than that of other developed nations including Sweden, Norway, and Australia.
  <sup>
   3
  </sup>
 </p>
 <h3>
  Causes of Inequal