---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 04.04.03"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2004/4/04.04.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Simple Machines, Engines and the Environment"
unitAuthor: "Raymond Brooks"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Science and Physical Science, grades 5-8."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 04.04.03:
</h4>
<p>
The focus of this unit is on small group instruction and contains a variety of resources where a student can research background information for his/her topic. This background material will provide the student an opportunity to look at his/her project in a variety of ways and help them decide on the focus of their project.
</p>
<p>
In most cases, the student involvement with physical science has been very limited. This lack of background is a reason why we will rely on computer-animated programs and aim to find a mentor qualified to help them in their area of interest.
</p>
<p>
This unit begins by talking about and understanding what work means to the science community. The next step is to introduce and/or review the 6 simple machines:
</p>
<blockquote>
<ul style="list-style-type: none">
<li>
- The Lever
</li>
<li>
- The Inclined Plane
</li>
<li>
- The Pulley
</li>
<li>
- The Wedge
</li>
<li>
- The Screw
</li>
<li>
- The Wheel and Axle
</li>
</ul>
</blockquote>
<p>
This is an important step as simple machines are basic to all machines.
</p>
<p>
The next section deals with internal (car) and external (steam) combustion engines. The basic operating procedures are investigated in detail through websites.
</p>
<p>
The unit ends by discussing the environmental impact of automobiles and how the world is trying to alleviate some of these problems.
</p>
<p>
(Developed for Science Fair and Science, grades 5-8; recommended for Science and Physical Science, grades 5-8)
</p>
</body>
