---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 03.05.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2003/5/03.05.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "The New Haven Oyster Industry and Water Quality"
unitAuthor: "Joanne R. Pompano"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for Marine Science, Environmental Science, and Visually Impaired Students, grades 9-12."
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 03.05.06:
</h4>
<p>
This curriculum unit is designed to help students understand the relationship between the water quality of Long Island Sound and the effect of pollutants on the shellfish living in its waters.
</p>
<p>
Developed for blind and visually impaired students, this unit offers suggestions for adapting lessons to provide students with the opportunity to learn about science and participate in science labs.  It also will be of interest to sighted peers and will provide activities that allow visually impaired students to work together with their sighted peers on water quality projects.
</p>
<p>
This curriculum allows students to:
</p>
<blockquote>
<ul style="list-style-type: none">
<li>
1. Examine the types, causes, and consequences of pollution in New Haven Harbor and Long Island Sound.
</li>
<li>
2. Inspect water quality.
</li>
<li>
3. Gain experience in using charts, diagrams, graphs, or measurements using recorded, tactile, large print or Braille materials.
</li>
<li>
4. Research using translations of textbooks, videotapes, computers, journal articles, supplementary reading materials, and handouts in Braille, large print, or audiotapes.
</li>
<li>
5. Participate in learning activities that develop scientific knowledge and skill.
</li>
<li>
6. Study the physical aspects of the oyster including: the structure and functioning of this bivalve, the nutrients it requires, how it reproduces, and how it is affected by water quality.
</li>
<li>
7. Gain an understanding of Long Island Sound and New Haven Harbor as well as the watershed that feeds into these bodies of water.
</li>
<li>
8. Learn about specific types and sources of pollutants.
</li>
<li>
9. Understand the tools used to detect, prevent, or correct problems.
</li>
<li>
10. Learn how governmental and environmental groups work to reduce the impacts of pollution on aquatic resources.
</li>
</ul>
</blockquote>
<p>
(Developed for “Life Skills for Blind and Partially Sighted,” grades 9-12; recommended for “Life Skills for Blind and Partially Sighted”, grades 9-12)
</p>
</body>
