---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry 95.05.10"
path: "/curriculum/guides/1995/5/95.05.10.x.html"
unitTitle: "A Mathematical Look at Connecticut’s Geological Environmental"
unitAuthor: "Eddie B. Rose"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "Recommended for grades K-2"
---
<body>
<hr/>
<h4>
Guide Entry to 95.05.10:
</h4>
<p>This curriculum may establish a community of learners in the classroom. The actual mathematics in this curriculum is not as important as the instructional strategies, such as communicating through writing or speaking, using manipulatives, working in cooperative groups, and using alternate forms of assessment.</p>

<p>Maps and scale drawings are used in everyday life and mathematics. This curriculum is for students to explore distance and angle measurement and the concept of reading and making maps. Students will be actively engaged in the process of learning as they work in group and individual settings. Students are asked to apply their learning in situations that will require an understanding of the concept of proportionality as it applies to measurement.</p>

<p>This method of instruction may be quite different than methods previously experienced by some students. The purpose of this curriculum is to introduce or reaffirm the instructional strategy and classroom practices used throughout this lesson. In other words, it sets the tone for the study of mathematics for the entire curriculum.</p>

<p>Please note that many of the activities in these lessons have more than one task. These multiple tasks provide flexibility for the teacher.</p>

<p>(Developed for Basic Mathematical, General Mathematical, and Mathematical Application, grades 6-12; recommended for Basic Mathematical, Mathematical Application and General Mathematical, grades K-12)</p>
</body>
