---
layout: "unit"
title: "20.01.07: Case Studies on Women and their Impact on Society: Using Powerful Narratives of Women to Teach the CRAIGs."
path: "/curriculum/units/2020/1/20.01.07.x.html"
unitTitle: "Case Studies on Women and their Impact on Society: Using Powerful Narratives of Women to Teach the CRAIGs."
unitAuthor: "Danny Roque"
---
<main>
	<h2>Introduction</h2>
<p>9th grade. Many studies have suggested that for the first time 9th graders, the year is one of the critical in the success of adolescents, and as they make their transition not only into high school but to an environment for which seemingly represents a microcosm of adulthood. Most schools have created courses specifically designed to help these students as they make one of the biggest transitions in their lives. These seminar-type courses have specific curriculums that will make this transition easier and focuses more on a variety of students' needs both academically and behaviorally.</p>
<p>In many cases, schools use their positive behavior interventions and support systems or PBIS, to help teach and encourage students to make the right choices behaviorally and not just for the four short years in high school but for adulthood as well. In our school our PBIS model as well as our core beliefs are known as the CRAIGs, or, Compassion, Respect, Action, Integrity, and Greatness. However, this transitional class has another goal in mind as well.</p>
<p>Along with this transition to high school, students will become more aware of truths in their academic lives. Students will learn not only more about themselves but also more about the world around them, their communities, and history. The misfortune of teaching children social studies in younger grades is the problem of textbooks and the narrow narratives that only tell partial parts or the most highlighted parts of history and the world, thus creating half-truths or even false information. Too often, students enter 9th grade with limited knowledge of their world. Over 50% of students do not know every continent on the planet. Most students do know how to describe how a democracy functions. Most students believe that some of the most critical reform movements were caused or led by a single person and not a group of people.</p>
<p>Thus, the goal of a freshman seminar class is to help them develop a better understanding of their world and themselves, on the basis of which they can adopt more positive and accurate mindsets and behaviors for future success.</p>
<h2>Rationale</h2>
<p>Typically, the seminar course has not followed a historical perspective to teach the transitional information students need in the 9th grade. When the CRAIGs are discussed, we usually go over them and break them down. However, a focus on women&rsquo;s studies will be more engaging and allow students to visualize the CRAIGs as applied to specific problems and challenges, and what to do about them. Active empathy translates into new views and healthier actions.</p>
<p>Through this unit, students will learn a broad narrative of the women's rights movement in the United States and elsewhere. We will begin with the present as to why there are still issues with equality among men and women, and search back through history for its causes.&nbsp; My objective will be to correct students&rsquo; misinformation and to encourage them to understand why gender inequality in its various forms--political, economic, and social--persists to the present day.</p>
<p>The inspirational examples of influential women will teach students the behaviors needed to succeed in the world. Case studies, informed by the CRAIGs structure, will be our starting point. :</p>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Compassion</strong></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Princess Diana</strong> Well known for her royal status, Princess Diana used her popularity to address pressing issues such as poverty, Aids, and social inequalities of various kinds. Her empathy and <strong>compassion </strong>towards people in crisis inspired the hearts of millions.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Respect</strong></p>
<p><strong>&nbsp;</strong></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Eleanor Roosevelt</strong> Often referred to as co-president during her tenure as FLOTUS, Mrs. Roosevelt was a champion for civil rights and other causes. As her husband became ill with polio, she often helped the president, serving as an inspirational example of a powerful and competent woman during a time of limited public female leadership.&nbsp;</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Integrity</strong></p>
<p><strong>&nbsp;</strong></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Rosa Parks</strong>: Often referred to as the change agent of the Civil Rights Movement, Rosa Parks&rsquo; small act of bravery and <strong>integrity </strong>had a lasting impact,&nbsp; establishing roots for the eventual adoption of the Civil Rights Act in 1968.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Action</strong></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Harriet Tubman </strong>The conductor of the Underground Railroad, whose <strong>actions</strong> were fortified by grit, and determination. Her strength mentally and physically stands out as Tubman is celebrated for taking an active and courageous role in fighting injustice.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Greatness</strong></p>
<p><strong>&nbsp;</strong></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Malala Yousafzai </strong>Her <strong>greatness </strong>came not from strength, but from courage.<strong>&nbsp; </strong>This teenager who was not afraid to stand up for unequal access to education faced by girls in the Middle East.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>Each case study will have several components to help illustrate the importance of CRAIGs for the pathway of women towards greater equality. Guiding questions will help the reader to see important acts of courage, and their effects on others. A vocabulary guide will help students who struggle with any tiered words in the readings. After the guided questions are completed and discussed as a whole group, the teacher may use further investigations such as small group or individual activities, research, and discussions to gain practice with primary sources.</p>
<h2>Understanding by Design</h2>
<p>This unit will consist of 3 sections and will be outlined using a Ubd template below. The first part of the focus is on vocabulary. Each biography will highlight new words and will ask the students to create TIP Charts (Term, Information, Picture) for each of the words.&nbsp; The second section will involve using primary and secondary sources to help the students develop a deeper understanding of the person in the biography.</p>
<p>At the end of the unit, the final product or assessment will be in the form a research project that can be presented in several formats that will ask students to choose from a long list of influential women and men and conduct their own case study and discuss and present how their person of their choosing will show all 5 of the CRAIGs and their significance in history and their impact on social justice /welfare. They will have the option of presenting this narrative in either an exhibit board, short documentary, short performance, or a website. Their project should essentially follow the same format as the unit plan itself.</p>
<p>PBL Unit: CRAIGs and Gender Equality: Creating biographies to showcase the commitments of the CRAIGs and to highlight to conflicts for equality</p>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<p><strong>Stage One: Desired Results</strong></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<p><strong>Goals</strong>: Students will be able to show mastery of the school-wide commitments of the CRAIGs through their learning of 5 historical case studies and in-turn, apply and transfer their understanding of the CRAIG commitments to a historical figure of their choosing and show how they impact gender equality.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Understandings&hellip;.</strong></p>
<p>●&nbsp; Students will understand that the CRAIGs are essential to success in and out of school</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Students will understand the power of authentic and critical narratives can have on society</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Students will understand how people engage in issues of social justice</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Essential Questions&hellip;.</strong></p>
<p>●&nbsp; How do people overcome adversity?</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Why is it important to have a strong moral character?</p>
<p>●&nbsp; How do people resolve conflict with themselves or with issues in society?</p>
<p>●&nbsp; How can you relate to these stories of adversity?</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Students will know...</strong></p>
<p>●&nbsp; Each of the CRAIG commitments</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Tier 2 and tier 3 vocab associated with each case study</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Students will be able to&hellip;</strong></p>
<p>●&nbsp; Conduct a research project that will showcase their understanding of the CRAIGs</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Reflect on their learning as well as provide critical feedback to other presenters as well</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<p><strong>Stage Two: Assessment Evidence</strong></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><strong>Performance Task</strong></p>
<p>Students will be asked to take on the role of a biographer and are tasked to choose one historical person and write a compelling narrative about how that individual not only showed the commitments of CRAIG but also committed themselves to forge through adversity to pursue gender equality.</p>
<p>Students will be asked to read or present their narratives in front of their peers in a book club styled setting. Students will be asked to reflect and give feedback on one another's work.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><strong>Other Evidence</strong></p>
<p>Students will have an opportunity to see and experience a model of the performance task through the 5 provided case studies.</p>
<p>Each case study will allow the teacher to check for understanding through several means.</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Each case study will have selected vocab words that will be broken down into the academic tiers. Students will create a TIP chart that will ask students to write down the term/word in one column, the definition of information in the middle column, and lastly, a picture that visually represents the term to better their understanding</p>
<p>●&nbsp; During the reading, there will be 2-3 different reading strategies that the teacher can use to help the students engage in the reading deeper</p>
<p>●&nbsp; After the reading, the teacher will provide an opportunity for reflection and feedback as the students will journal their thoughts and ideas about the narrative and its connection to the essential questions</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Lastly, each case study will contain extension activities for the students and teacher to dive deeper by looking at primary sources related to the historical person</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<p><strong>Stage Three: Learning Plan</strong></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td colspan="2">
<p><strong>Learning Activities</strong></p>
<p>●&nbsp; The unit will begin with a K-W-L chart to examine the student&rsquo;s prior knowledge of the case studies and the CRAIGs. This will also be the time to establish the learning goals for the unit</p>
<p>●&nbsp; To engage and hook the students, we will look at one example of gender inequality and take a brief look at the issues facing women presently in America</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Students will have to engage in a variety of reading strategies during the case studies</p>
<p>●&nbsp; Students will put all work in their journals and this will also serve as the place where students will take time at the end of each case study to reflect on the CRAIGs, the individuals, and the essential questions</p>
<p>●&nbsp; In the performance task, students will have an opportunity to present their research narratives in a variety of ways; a documentary, slide show, paper, play, or poster board</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<h2>Case Study 1: Princess Diana &amp; How Compassion Has No Boundaries</h2>
<p><em>&ldquo;Carry out a random act of kindness, with no expectation of reward, safe in the knowledge that one day someone might do the same for you&rdquo; - Princess Diana</em></p>
<h3>Guided/Essential Questions:</h3>
<ol>
<li>What is compassion?</li>
<li>How can compassion drive one&rsquo;s understanding of empathy?</li>
</ol>
<h3>Vocab:</h3>
<ol>
<li>Royal Family</li>
<li>Leprosy</li>
<li>AIDS</li>
</ol>
<h3>Standing out amongst the Royal Family</h3>
<p>Married at the early age of 20, Diana Frances Spencer or better known as Princess Diana became an English princess. Often, this meant a life prescribed with an enormous list of dos and don'ts. However, as time grew she often pushed on these boundaries. With the facade of a happy marriage, Diana endured a turbulent union with Prince George, and the sake of her children, she tried to keep the family together for as long as she could. Her compassion for her children stood out amongst royal traditions. She wanted to be as close as possible to her children, despite the paparazzi and her Royal schedule, she wanted to be a mother first before a princess.</p>
<p>Despite strict royal protocols, she wanted her children to live outside the royal and aristocrat bubble and brought them along with her as much as possible, from charity events, dinners, to amusement parks with the public. Unlike any other royal, Diana wanted her children to be empathic with the public, she wanted the children to exposed to the world in ways that prior royal families had not</p>
<h3>Humanitarian Work</h3>
<p>It wasn&rsquo;t shortly after her honeymoon that Diana&rsquo;s compassion compelled her to begin her charity and humanitarian work around the world. With her celebrity and compassion, she knew that by traveling to see humanitarian crises she would help expose the rest of the world to issues that were not regularly on the news. She often visited countries within Africa that were pressed with critical health issues. In the early 90s, she visited hospitals that had numerous leprosy patients, and to prove that the disease wasn&rsquo;t transmitted through touch, she bravely shook hands with the patients in hopes of getting them more help from others.</p>
<p>Even more daring was another trip to Africa in which she visited war-torn countries that were riddled with landmines and thousands of people who have either been innocently killed or left limbless as a result. As nerve-wracking and dangerous this humanitarian cause was, Princess Diana felt compelled she needed to bring light to the issue. With numerous reporters watching, she took steps through the active landmines and visited numerous people who were affected by the explosions on live television so that millions could witness the horrors in which these people were living. After her visit, many world leaders would credit her for the help and removal of landmines from their countries as well.</p>
<p>Another notable cause Diana worked to shed light on was the issue and perception of those affected by the AIDS viruses. Similar to the situation with leprosy, for a long time people were misinformed about how viruses like AIDS and HIV could travel and be transmitted. In order to combat these claims, Diana would travel about to see patients with the viruses and shook their hands, held them, and even carried children without any sort of protection. Her boldness and compassion would be the starting point to change the stigma.</p>
<h3>Life Cut Short</h3>
<p>As her marriage with Prince Charles took a turn for the worse, the media began to shift away from the compassionate side of Diana and placed more pressure on her private marriage life. As more media grew around the issue, it gave her little time to do the things she compassionately cared for; being a mother for not only her children but for those who were in need of help from their own sufferings. Instead of focusing on this important work, she had to defend herself constantly to the media. It wouldn't be until her death would the media change their tone back to the positive work Diana focused on.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Further investigation activities: Using resources to gain a deeper insight and broader perspective</p>
<ol>
<li>With such a heavy media presence around Princess Diana as she went about her humanitarian work, create a photo essay that goes in detail about her visits around the world combating the issues she worked on.</li>
<li>Nearing the end of her life, the media quickly changed its tone from focusing on Princess Diana&rsquo;s humanitarian work to her personal challenges with her husband. As the situation deepened it ultimately consumed her time and took away from her humanitarian work.&nbsp; In a short essay reflect on her situation and think about the following question; why is it important that we don't allow people&rsquo;s perception of ourselves to change or affect our way of life?</li>
</ol>
<h2>Case Study 2: Eleanor Roosevelt: Respect for &ldquo;The First Lady of the World&rdquo;</h2>
<p><em>&ldquo;No one can make you feel inferior without your consent&rdquo; - Eleanor Roosevelt </em></p>
<h3>Guided/Essential Questions:</h3>
<ol>
<li>How would Eleanor Roosevelt&rsquo;s actions and decisions impact matters of social justice and inequalities?</li>
<li>Explain at least one example of how Eleanor dealt with adversity?</li>
<li>What does Eleanor&rsquo;s respect for others teach us about respecting ourselves and others?</li>
</ol>
<h3>Vocab to know and define:</h3>
<ul>
<li>Empathy</li>
<li>Inauguration</li>
<li>Great Depression</li>
</ul>
<h3>Early Life</h3>
<p>Eleanor Roosevelt did not change her character, look for a new destiny, or seek escape for the pain of her tribulations. Even in the face of political and emotional attacks, she committed herself to humble service.&nbsp; We know her today for countless acts of courage and progressive values.</p>
<p>On October 11th, 1894, Eleanor was born into wealthy circumstances; but those circumstances did not shield her from hardship. Her mother constantly critiqued her looks and shunned young Eleanor, imprinting on her the feeling that she was unattractive. Her mother called her &ldquo;granny&rdquo; which caused her to be very shy and introverted growing up. Her father, who took care of her after her mother&rsquo;s passing, was an alcoholic. Eleanor adored her father and a strong bond with him. He encouraged her to have strong ideas and pushed her to grow up noble, loving, and maintain a good character. However, her father&rsquo;s alcoholism would eventually lead to his death.&nbsp; As a result, she was sent to boarding school in England. Although her childhood wasn&rsquo;t ideal, Eleanor emerged with a strong sense of empathy and affinity for the less fortunate. She sought to help others throughout her life.</p>
<h3>The President</h3>
<p>The niece of Theodore Roosevelt, Eleanor was destined to be a part of a progressive way of life. A distant cousin of hers, Franklin D. Roosevelt, was obsessed with Teddy. When Franklin and Eleanor married, Teddy walked young Eleanor down the aisle. Giving birth to four children, Eleanor's life became in many ways typical for women of her day.</p>
<p>However, being the wife of a president gave her an unusual and highly visible platform from which to exert influence for good. Her husband&rsquo;s limited physical capacity and her eagerness to help those in need made them a potentially good team, but FDR sometimes deflected criticism from her activities by saying they were his wife&rsquo;s idea and not his. As divisions between the president and Eleanor became more apparent in the later years of his presidency, Eleanor was the stronger voice on issues of social justice.</p>
<h3>A Growing Independence</h3>
<p>Two events led to a desire for greater autonomy in Eleanor&rsquo;s life. The first occurred after FDR contracted polio and became dependent on his friends, sons, and Eleanor. It was no easy task. Every day, Eleanor helped her husband with morning and nightly tasks, giving him his medications and enemas, and even inserting glass catheters. While this may have been a burden on the couple, it allowed Eleanor the ability to travel and help carry on and present the President&rsquo;s messages including New Deal policies. It was also at this time that Eleanor discovered his affair with Lucy Mercer; and despite this revelation, she carried on courageously.&nbsp; Eleanor became if anything more assertive in convincing FDR to continue his political efforts when others cautioned him against it on account of his polio.</p>
<p>Shortly after FDR&rsquo;s inauguration, he wished Eleanor to leave her many activities in order to devote herself to the ceremonial roles as FLOTUS. e. However, Eleanor had other ideas. She knew of her influence on women and was deeply troubled by this idea so instead, she cleared the White House social calendar (aside from events pertaining to children) and set forth on a path no other First Lady has taken. With her own staff, tutors, travel itineraries, and the first weekly radio broadcast for a FLOTUS, Eleanor took to the global stage.</p>
<p>Unlike President Hoover and other politicians during the Great Depression, not only did Eleanor seek to help those in need; she was on the frontlines. She would spend days with some of the most affected. Listening, empathizing, learning of those in the need to help draft later policies, and championing public works and arts programs alike.</p>
<p>On issues of women&rsquo;s rights, she not only founded schools to provide empowerment and education for young women but would also create &ldquo;SheSheShe camps&rdquo;. One of the New Deal programs created by FDR was called the Civilian Conservation Corps which focused on jobs in service of land and environmental conservation. Eleanor loved the idea of it promoting conservation but one flaw in her eyes was that it was only for men.&nbsp; Working with the Secretary of Labor, they created camps for women to employ women and teach them valuable skills.</p>
<p>Her passion for military troops was evident during the war as she visited hospitals at home and abroad. Earning the nickname &lsquo;rover,&rsquo; she traveled nearly 25,000 miles and even lost 25lbs in the process of visiting the troops.&nbsp; She also brought hundreds to the White House to celebrate and honor them.</p>
<p>All of this was evident not only in the vast trips and events she participated in but in her read and listened to weekly by millions in her &ldquo;My Day Column&rdquo; and radio broadcasts. Her outspoken and compassionate character truly transcended the role of the FLOTUS. Her activism then as it is now, is beyond measure and incredibly inspirational, unwavering in her fight for social welfare in every facet of life until her life&rsquo;s end.</p>
<h3>A Stance Taken and A Legacy Forged</h3>
<p>No matter the criticism, if it came from people who argued that she did not dress formally enough and no matter who it came from, even her own husband who during key issues was silent, Eleanor never stood down and made sure her voice was heart. During wartime, she was outspoken and publicly against the treatment of refugee&rsquo;s home and aboard. In her newspaper column, she often spoke of the conditions of the Japanese Internment Camps and voiced her concerns over keeping any American there and requested that they leave as soon as possible.</p>
<p>She made valiant efforts to work with several agencies to bring refugee children in war zones a chance to escape to the United States. Eleanor single-handedly was able to bring home 100 refugees stuck on a passenger ship the SS Quanza in 1940. However, her stance on these issues further divided her from FDR as he was more interested in the military campaigns.</p>
<p>Another issue FDR was silent on was race. However, Eleanor made up for his silence. She spoke at many events, but none captured the nation as the situation with singer Marian Anderson. The famous singer was invited to sing &ldquo;My Country, Tis of Thee&rdquo; and sought to use the auditorium at Constitutional Hall in Washington, however, it was owned by the Daughters of the Revolution who had a &lsquo;whites-only&rsquo; policy in their contracts.</p>
<p>Rather than remain a member of the DAR and passively accept what the DAR did, Eleanor chose to resign from the group as a result of not allowing Marian to sing. The result was found with positive headlines and her very public resignation from the DAR over the issue was front page and none could question her commitment to race at this point. Marian would later find herself singing at the Lincoln Memorial in front of some 75,000 people.</p>
<p>After FDR&rsquo;s passing, President Harry Truman famously asked Eleanor if there was anything he or the government could do for her.&nbsp; In response, Eleanor said, &ldquo;What can I do for you?&rdquo; While she was saddened over FDR&rsquo;s passing, she was just as troubled about the state of the nation and the countless programs that she and her husband had put in place for the country. After 13 years in office, there was no mistake that FDR&rsquo;s impact and presence would be missed, and she knew that the incoming president could use some help. Shortly after, Truman announced that Eleanor would be the Secretary to the United Nations, a role she carried until her life&rsquo;s end and one that was close to her heart.</p>
<p>Social welfare and human rights were near and dear to Eleanor and she worked tirelessly to create a Declaration of Human Rights that every human need have. She worked with many members of the UN to help create and incorporate the Declaration into agreement although the United State wouldn't join until many years later under George Bush.</p>
<h3>Further investigation activities: Using resources to gain a deeper insight and broader perspective</h3>
<ol>
<li>Analyze the 1934 speech Eleanor gave called, "The Washington Conference On Negro Education Speech" What is the message Eleanor is giving about education and segregation?</li>
<li>Research and investigate several of Eleanor&rsquo;s &ldquo;My Day&rdquo; columns. What can we conclude about her character and her values on social welfare?</li>
<li>In 1939, Eleanor resigned from the Daughters of the American Revolution in support of African American opera singer Marian Anderson. Research this event and explain why she took this action.</li>
<li>Analyze the speech given at the United Nations to memorialize Eleanor and, using evidence, explain why according to the speaker was Eleanor respected and called the &ldquo;first lady of the world&rdquo;?</li>
</ol>
<h2>Case Study 3: Rosa Parks - Having the Integrity To Do The Right Thing</h2>
<p><em>&ldquo;No, the only tired I was, was tired of giving in&rdquo; - Rosa Parks</em></p>
<h3>Guided/Essential Questions:</h3>
<ol>
<li>What is integrity?</li>
<li>In what ways, actions, or events, did Rosa Parks' story teach us about Integrity?</li>
</ol>
<h3>Vocab to know and define:</h3>
<ul>
<li>Boycott</li>
<li>Supreme Court</li>
<li>Montgomery Bus Boycott</li>
<li>Ed Nixon</li>
</ul>
<h3>Early Life under Jim Crow<strong>&nbsp;</strong></h3>
<p>Born in 1913, Rosa Louise McCauley and her family were very familiar with the woes and inequalities that African Americans faced in the deep south. Growing up in Alabama, her family were sharecroppers and her grandmother was a former slave. She would be all too familiar with segregation and the inequalities that African Americans had to endure. Despite this, Rosa made it a point that she did not want to be treated this way. Her mother had taught her to have strong moral principles and to have integrity at a young age which was incredibly difficult during the Jim Crow Era.</p>
<p>She kept these principles and at every opportunity engaged in Civil Rights activism. At the age of 19, she married another activist who later became her husband, Raymond Parks. Raymond feared that her activism would get her hurt as she wasn't fast enough to run from the police and others in the south who protested the activists, but this wouldn't slow her down.</p>
<p>In 1953 an incident occurred on a bus that left a major impression on Rosa Parks. While boarding a bus one day, as she deposited her money and headed toward the back of the bus, the driver turned to her and told her to exit the bus and use the rear door to board. Instead, she kept on going figuring she was already on the bus. The driver got up and rushed to her and raised his hand in a violent motion at which point Rosa looked back and told the driver that he better not hit her.</p>
<p>Soon after she became close friends with E. D. Nixon Jr., a man who was deeply against segregation and would give her an opportunity to help teach a youth group about Civil Rights. She also befriended Virginia Durr who would later help Rosa develop new ideas around activism and learn to incorporate ideals of non-violence, these ideals, of course, would be put to the test shortly after.</p>
<p>In 1955, after arriving home from a retreat with Virginia Durr, Parks entered a bus without realizing it was the same driver from some years earlier. As she took her seat in the colored section of the packed bus, the driver picked up a white man and had to tell the African American passengers to get out of their seats to accommodate the white man. The Driver had asked 4 people to move, 3 did and 1 did not, that person was Rosa Parks. Despite being in the colored section of the bus, she felt she had done nothing wrong, and using non-violence, she took a stand, which was unheard of at the time, and refused to give up the seat. She was subsequently arrested and in this one amazing moment, her simple act became a catalyst for the Civil Rights movement.</p>
<h3>381 Days</h3>
<p>With an extraordinary effort from activists, youth groups, pastors, and community members, the very next day nearly 35,000 pamphlets were printed and distributed around the city of Montgomery. While some believed it would only last a few days, with the chant, &ldquo;no rider&rsquo;s today&rdquo;, the boycott would last over an entire year.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Rosa Parks, however, did not have as much enthusiasm as she was wrongfully charged with disturbing the peace. However, her small act would allow her case to travel up the Supreme Court where history would later be made for the fight against segregation. When leaders met after Rosa Parks was released, with a young Dr. King leading, asked the members of the community if they wanted to continue the boycott, they all agreed without hesitation.</p>
<p>Over the course of the year, Ms. Parks was very busy. From organizing people to help transport fellow African-Americans, setting up men to walk young women to and from school, even securing hundreds of bicycles so the men could bike to work. Through good weather and bad, the boycott effort was unwavering.</p>
<p>Ms. Parks had to endure her own struggles as well. As the southern white community resisted the change and were angry over the boycott, the influences of several leaders were able to get Ms. Parks fired from her job only one month into the boycott. While the boycotters, Ms. Parks, and Dr. King insisted that the movement was one of non-violence, the KKK responded with barbaric violence and disregard of life. Fires, bombings, and marches were a common occurrence. Even after Dr. King&rsquo;s home was bombed and the community wanted vengeance, he declared that retaliation and violence should and never be the answer.</p>
<h3>The &ldquo;Mother of the Civil Rights Movement&rdquo;</h3>
<p>Synonymous with the Montgomery Bus Boycott, on December 17th, 1956, the Supreme Court order for the buses to be integrated into Montgomery after rejecting the cities appeal and thus segregation in public transportation was outlawed, and that major win, not only cemented Ms. Park&rsquo;s legacy but essentially became the catalyst for the civil rights movement to come.</p>
<p>Further investigation activities: Using resources to gain a deeper insight and broader perspective</p>
<ol>
<li>Using the Library of Congress, research primary sources either in video or archived newspapers about the events of the boycott. What messages can you find? How did people define the actions of the boycott and Rosa Parks?</li>
<li>On the eve of the boycott, Martin Luther King spoke at the Holt Street Baptist Church, what was his message?</li>
<li>What role did disc jockeys like Marius &ldquo;Ace&rdquo; Anderson play in the successful boycott?</li>
</ol>
<h2>Case Study 4: Conductor, Spy, Abolitionist: Harriet Tubman &amp; the Call to Action</h2>
<p><em>&ldquo;I was the conductor of the Underground Railroad for eight years, and I can say what most conductors can&rsquo;t say &mdash; I never ran my train off the track and I never lost a passenger.&rdquo; - Harriet Tubman</em></p>
<h3>Guided/Essential Questions:</h3>
<ol>
<li>Why is an action an important step in activism?</li>
<li>What actions did Harriet Tubman take to create better futures for herself and others?</li>
</ol>
<h3>Vocab to know and define:</h3>
<ul>
<li>Servitude</li>
<li>Plantation</li>
<li>Slavery</li>
<li>Conductor</li>
<li>Underground Railroad</li>
<li>Civil War</li>
</ul>
<h3>Intro &amp; a Life in Slavery</h3>
<p>Born into slavery sometime between 1820 and 1822, lived on a plantation in Dorchester County, Maryland with eight other siblings.&nbsp; By the time she was five, she was rented out to her master &lsquo;s neighbor and served there for many years as a servant.&nbsp; But even at an early age, she did what she could to help others around her. When she was 12 she suffered major head trauma when she tried to help another enslaved person who was being beaten by a plantation owner. Throughout her younger years, she was faced with the constant trauma of seeing her sibling being taken away, families torn apart, and endless violence among the enslaved.</p>
<p>Iron willed and with such strength that she could do any job that of an enslaved man could do, Harriet&rsquo;s determination and hope were just as strong. As the country grew more and more divided and a path towards Civil War loomed, Harriet&rsquo;s efforts in freeing the enslaved never wavered. Her call to action is truly remarkable and the lengths that she took to find freedom and help others get freedom could have ended her life. Without her actions, thousands of slaves would not have been freed.</p>
<p>In 1849 she made the daring escape without her husband who was not as willing. She ran night and day. On foot or with other freed people. Through a series of networks and &lsquo;stations&rsquo;, both white and black people helped and encouraged her to safety despite a handsome reward to bring her back to the plantation. Once she reached Pennsylvania, she was finally freed. But this was just the start of her story.</p>
<h3>&ldquo;The Moses of Her People&rdquo;</h3>
<p>Over the next 13 years, with a pistol by her side and bloodhounds behind her, she made the trip 13 times to the eastern shore of Maryland to rescue other enslaved people and various family members.&nbsp; Courage isn't a bold enough word to describe her heroism. Stories of Harriet running for days on end, miles through rough terrains and bad weather, even hiding in plain sight as an elderly woman to get to her destinations. She fiercely believed in either having liberty or death.</p>
<h3>Civil War &amp; Legacy</h3>
<p>Her time during the Civil War was nothing short of amazing as well. Enlisting in the army in South Carolina. During her time, she fought on the frontlines, cared for the wounded in the war hospitals, fed the troops, crossed through enemy lines with a group of spies, and would become the first woman to lead an expedition to free some 800 slaves.</p>
<p>While her activism around equality would never end, she would later also join Susan B. Anthony in helping move forward women&rsquo;s rights. By the time of her death in 1913 she was over 90 years old and lived a life few could live up to. Never once running her train off the track and never once, losing a passenger.</p>
<h3>Further investigation activities: Using resources to gain a deeper insight and broader perspective</h3>
<ol>
<li>Research and create either an online or paper version of the Underground Railroad with captions that describe major places or events.</li>
<li>Read, discuss, and analyze several of Harriet Tubman&rsquo;s personal experiences and memoirs.</li>
</ol>
<h2>Case Study 5: Malala Yousafzai &amp; How One Act of Greatness Could Change the World</h2>
<p><em>&ldquo;One child, one teacher, one book, and one pen, can change the world&rdquo; - Malala Yousafzai </em></p>
<h3>Guided/Essential Questions:</h3>
<ol>
<li>How do you define someone as being &lsquo;great&rsquo;?</li>
<li>How would Malala define greatness?</li>
</ol>
<h3>Vocab to know and define:</h3>
<ul>
<li>Taliban</li>
<li>Pakistan</li>
<li>Activism</li>
<li>United Nations</li>
</ul>
<h3>Early Beginnings in Education &amp; Activism</h3>
<p>From a young age, Malala Yousafzai learned that the key to freedom, equality, and dreams of becoming a doctor was education. Living in Swat, Pakistan, Malala attended a private school that her father oversaw. The region was known for having hundreds of schools and education was paramount although very few girls could attend. However, tensions between the country and the terrorist organization of the Taliban would forever change Malala&rsquo;s destiny.</p>
<p>The oppression of the Taliban was the strict form of Sharia Law that was horrifying. As the Taliban's presence grew and intensified in Pakistan. The Taliban would take control of the city, forcing an oppressive rule of the city with public killings, kidnappings, and the forced closure of schools, forcing Malala and the civilians to flee for their lives. Life as they knew and her dreams of getting an education were fading away. Like her father, young Malala wasn't keen on staying silent.</p>
<p>As the Pakistani forces clashed with the Taliban, both Malala and her father were outspoken in activism for freeing Pakistan from the Taliban and restoring education to the children. Her cries for help wouldn&rsquo;t go unseen as the Pakistani media put her front and center. From speeches, television interviews, blogging online, even meeting with advisors from America, Malala was consistently pushing for protection and education. Malala thus was as much on the front lines as the soldiers were, fighting against the Taliban.</p>
<h3>From Refugee to Nobel Peace Prize</h3>
<p>As her popularity grew in and out of Pakistan, the Taliban began to see a growing threat to their ideals and their hatred of the west. In late 2012, the orders were sent to kill the young Malala. As she was on a school bus on her way to school, she was shot in the head and faced life-threatening injuries. As doctors fought to save her life amidst the complex nature of the unfolding events, she was sent to the United Kingdom.</p>
<p>Surviving the attempted assassination, seemingly almost overnight Malala became a worldwide figure for something bigger. As she recovered from her injuries, her mission and dreams of encouraging girls to receive an education never faded and grew to an international audience. As she pressed on, she began championing her quest on a global scale. Speaking around the world to audiences, global leaders, and the United Nations, with the message of unequivocal and equal education for everyone using nonviolence as her tactics. Even with the Taliban still claiming her as a threat, Malala would become the youngest person to win the Nobel Peace Prize.</p>
<p>Further lesson activities: Using resources to gain a deeper insight and broader perspective</p>
<ol>
<li>Read, analyze, and discuss several chapters from Malala&rsquo;s memoir; I Am Malala: The Girl Who Stood up for Education and Shot by the Taliban</li>
</ol>
<h3>Research Project Handout</h3>
<p>Name:</p>
<p>Period:</p>
<p>Date:</p>
<p>CRAIGs and Gender Equality: Using and Creating Biographies to Showcase the Commitments of the CRAIGs and to Highlight to Conflicts for Equality</p>
<h3>Your Task</h3>
<p>After reading, reviewing, and discussing our reflections on the case studies and the CRAIGs, it is important now that you transfer those skills and understandings into your own case study.&nbsp; Below you will find a list of individuals who have fought for the social justice causes of gender inequalities.&nbsp;</p>
<ul>
<li>The What: Your project must address the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How do people overcome adversity?</li>
<li>Why is it important to have a strong moral character?</li>
<li>How do people resolve conflict with themselves or with issues in society?</li>
<li>How can you relate to these stories of adversity?</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>The How: You may create this narrative by following:
<ul>
<li>Written: 2-page paper with a bibliography</li>
<li>Visual: a 10-minute presentation through a documentary or Google Slide with bibliography</li>
<li>Spatial: You can make a short presentation or play with bibliography</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>The When &amp; Where:
<ul>
<li>You will have 5 class periods to complete the project and will present it to the class in a book club styled format with questions and reflection afterward.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<h3>The List</h3>
<p>You may use any of the following historical figures to research. If you have another suggestion, please let me know!</p>
<ol>
<li>Sojourner Truth</li>
<li>Ida B. Wells</li>
<li>Frida Kahlo</li>
<li>Simone de Beauvoir</li>
<li>Yuri Kochiyama</li>
<li>Ruth Bader Ginsberg</li>
<li>Audre Lorde</li>
<li>Marsha P. Johnson</li>
<li>Sylvia Rivera</li>
<li>Sally Ride</li>
<li>Mary Mcleod Bethune</li>
<li>Rose Schneiderman</li>
<li>Frederick Douglass</li>
<li>Bayard Rustin</li>
<li>Harvey Milk</li>
<li>James Baldwin</li>
<li>Martin Luther King Jr.</li>
<li>Ta-Nehisi Coates</li>
<li>Nelson Mandela</li>
<li>Ai Weiwei</li>
<li>Pauli Murray</li>
<li>John Robert Lewis</li>
</ol>
<h4>Appendix on Implementing District Standards</h4>
<p>Students will be assessed on two standards throughout the project. One is specifically for their ability to use evidence and the other is geared towards their ability to demonstrate awareness of themselves and others.</p>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td>
<p>Indicator</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Exemplary</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Competent</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Emerging</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Novice</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Demonstrate awareness and consideration for self, others, and the larger community.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can</p>
<p>●&nbsp; recognize and address the patterns and conflicts among perspectives, positions, and values of myself, others, and the larger community.</p>
<p>●&nbsp; anticipate how my words and actions may be interpreted by or impact others purposefully select words, actions, mindsets, and behaviors to meet the needs of others and myself.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can</p>
<p>●&nbsp; identify perspectives, positions, and values of myself, others, and the larger community.</p>
<p>●&nbsp; make choices with my words, actions, mindsets, and behaviors that strive to address the needs of myself, others, and the community.</p>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can</p>
<p>&middot;&nbsp; identify my own perspectives, positions, and values and broadly identify perspectives, positions, and values of others.</p>
<p>&middot;&nbsp; recognize and reflect on how my words, actions, attitudes, and behaviors impact others and the community.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can</p>
<p>●&nbsp; identify my own perspectives, positions, and values.</p>
<p>●&nbsp; recognize that my words, actions, attitudes, and behaviors impact others</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Use evidence and sound reasoning to communicate and support an idea</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can...</p>
<p>●&nbsp; integrate relevant evidence effectively to support my idea;</p>
<p>●&nbsp; use sound reasoning to present ideas and address opposing positions to achieve my purpose.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can...</p>
<p>●&nbsp; incorporate evidence that supports clear communication of my idea;</p>
<p>●&nbsp; use sound reasoning to present ideas aligned with my purpose.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can...</p>
<p>●&nbsp; select evidence that connects to my goal;</p>
<p>●&nbsp; organize and present ideas based on my purpose.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>I can...</p>
<p>●&nbsp; identify evidence that could relate to my topic;</p>
<p>●&nbsp; share ideas related to my topic.</p>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p><span>&nbsp;</span></p>
<h2>Bibliography</h2>
<p>"9 Reasons Princess Diana Was So Much More Than A Style Icon." Harper's BAZAAR. Last modified August 31, 2018. https://www.harpersbazaar.com/culture/features/a9639085/princess-diana-charity-work/.</p>
<p>"An Act of Courage, The Arrest Records of Rosa Parks." National Archives. Last modified December 21, 2016. https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/rosa-parks.</p>
<p>Annalora, Amanda E., "Eleanor Roosevelt The Ugly Duckling to the First Lady of the World" (2010).</p>
<p>Education and Human Development Master's Theses. 1.</p>
<p>http://digitalcommons.brockport.edu/ehd_theses/1</p>
<p>"ASSESSING ELEANOR ROOSEVELT AS A FEMINIST." The New York Times - Breaking News, World News &amp; Multimedia. Last modified November 5, 1984. https://www.nytimes.com/1984/11/05/style/assessing-eleanor-roosevelt-as-a-feminist.html.</p>
<p>Brenner, Marie. "Malala Yousafzai: The 15-Year-Old Pakistani Girl Who Wanted More from Her Country." Vanity Fair. Last modified March 15, 2013. https://www.vanityfair.com/news/politics/2013/04/malala-yousafzai-pakistan-profile.</p>
<p>"Documenting a Pakistani Girl&rsquo;s Transformation." The New York Times - Breaking News, World News &amp; Multimedia. Last modified October 8, 2013. https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/08/world/asia/the-making-of-Malala.html.</p>
<p>"Eleanor Roosevelt - Americans and the Holocaust - United States Holocaust Memorial Museum." Online Exhibitions &mdash; United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Accessed July&nbsp;28,&nbsp;2020. https://exhibitions.ushmm.org/americans-and-the-holocaust/personal-story/eleanor-roosevelt.</p>
<p>"Eleanor Roosevelt: Undo the Mistake of Internment (U.S. National Park Service)." NPS.gov (U.S. National Park Service). Last modified June 29, 2018. https://www.nps.gov/articles/erooseveltinternment.htm.</p>
<p>"Eleanor Roosevelt." National Women's History Museum. Accessed July&nbsp;28,&nbsp;2020. https://www.womenshistory.org/education-resources/biographies/eleanor-roosevelt.</p>
<p>"Eleanor Roosevelt's "My Day" | American Experience | PBS." PBS: Public Broadcasting Service. Last modified September 19, 2017. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/eleanor-race/.</p>
<p>"Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum - Marian Anderson." Franklin D. Roosevelt Library &amp; Museum. Accessed July&nbsp;28,&nbsp;2020. https://docs.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/tmirhfee.html.</p>
<p>"Harriet Tubman Timeline." Department of Mathematics - Department of Mathematics - University at Buffalo. Accessed July&nbsp;28,&nbsp;2020. https://www.math.buffalo.edu/~sww/0history/hwny-tubman.html.</p>
<p>"Harriet Tubman." PBS: Public Broadcasting Service. Accessed July&nbsp;28,&nbsp;2020. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aia/part4/4p1535.html.</p>
<p>"Harriet Tubman&rsquo;s Path to Freedom." The New York Times - Breaking News, World News &amp; Multimedia. Last modified February 24, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/02/24/travel/underground-railroad-slavery-harriet-tubman-byway-maryland.html?.</p>
<p>"Historian: What the True Story of Harriet Tubman Teaches Us." Time. Last modified November 1, 2019. https://time.com/5715477/harriet-tubman-escape/.</p>
<p>"How Princess Diana's Humanitarian Causes Have Fared, 20 Years On." Time. Last modified August 25, 2017. https://time.com/4914377/princess-diana-humanitarian-work/.</p>
<p>"Princess Diana Changed the Idea of What a Princess Should Be." National Geographic. Last modified May 18, 2018. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/2017/08/princess-lady-diana-death-20th-anniversary-television-special/#close.</p>
<p>Pritz, Elie. "Malala Yousafzai." Peace Heroes. Last modified 2016. https://globalpeaceheroes.org/</p>
<p>"Rosa Parks Refuses to Give Up Her Seat | How Rosa Parks Fought for Civil Rights | Scholastic.com." https://teacher.scholastic.com/rosa/sittingdown.htm.</p>
<p>"Rosa Parks, 92, Founding Symbol of Civil Rights Movement, Dies." The New York Times - Breaking News, World News &amp; Multimedia. Last modified October 25, 2005. https://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/25/us/rosa-parks-92-founding-symbol-of-civil-rights-movement-dies.html.</p>
<p>"Rosa Parks: A Primary Source Gallery." Library of Congress. https://www.loc.gov/teachers/classroommaterials/presentationsandactivities/presentations/rosa-parks-gallery/.</p>
<p>"Rosa Parks." National Women's History Museum.. https://www.womenshistory.org/education-resources/biographies/rosa-parks.</p>
<p>"You Still Don't Know the Whole Rosa Parks Story." Time. Last modified November 30, 2015. https://time.com/4125377/rosa-parks-60-years-video/.</p>
</main>
