---
layout: "unit"
title: "20.01.03: Women in Africa during the time of Apartheid:  From Trauma to Transition, 2020"
path: "/curriculum/units/2020/1/20.01.03.x.html"
unitTitle: "Women in Africa during the time of Apartheid:  From Trauma to Transition, 2020"
unitAuthor: "Felicia Fountain"
---
<main>
	<h2>Introduction</h2>
<p>I teach Social Studies to students in grades six and seven at an inter-district, K-8 school for the New Haven Public School District located in New Haven, Connecticut.&nbsp; My school is home to more than 700 students, with most of them hailing from urban and neighborhood communities.&nbsp; My background is in instruction with the bulk of my years as a language arts teacher and working in the area of curriculum and instruction.&nbsp; The timing of this unit links quite well with the current happenings across the United States as well as the world.&nbsp; Currently, the Black Lives Matter Movement has become an event of monumental importance.&nbsp; The movement has arisen out of concerns over the deaths of African Americans during and after interactions with police&mdash;most notably Mr. George Floyd.&nbsp; These human rights and social justice issues are at the forefront for individuals, corporations, organizations, schools and businesses. The practice and acceptance of systemic racism is also being challenged.&nbsp; The civil rights of African Americans and whether there were measurable and consistent &ldquo;gains&rdquo; made during the Civil Rights Movement that still exist today are also being contemplated.&nbsp; In turn, the practices of police, town officials, corporations, health and medical fields etc., are being looked at through the lens of The Black Lives Matter Movement which puts a spotlight on practices and actions of&nbsp; &ldquo;individuals, groups, and institutions&rdquo; and demands that injustices be made right and crooked places and practices to come into alignment.</p>
<p>During this unit, there will be several opportunities for students to address their experiences as well as take a closer look at the experiences of those written about in the unit.&nbsp; Students will take a journey into the time periods of Apartheid in South Africa and the Jim Crow Era/Civil Rights Movement in America.&nbsp; Students will be exposed to practices that would be described as &ldquo;man&rsquo;s inhumanity to man,&rdquo; but are often left out of Social Studies textbooks and glossed over-- if ever addressed in middle school classrooms.</p>
<h2>Background</h2>
<p>These activities are designed for middle school students.&nbsp; However, there are aspects of this unit that can be adapted for student in lower or higher-grade levels.&nbsp; Many of the activities in this unit will allow the learner to represent his or her knowledge in many different formats as well as integrated with other disciplines.<strong>&nbsp; </strong>Research, data collection and analysis, problem solving through the vehicle of peer collaboration, leads to informed decision-making and problem-solving. The study of Africa is part of the curriculum for the New Haven Public School System. What I have found during my time teaching the curriculum is that many students are still in need of a stronger background in geography skills.&nbsp; This may be due in part to the structuring of the classes and the needs to ensure that students are prepared to read, write and analyze text.&nbsp; I believe the greater benefit is that Social Studies supports the areas of Reading (English Language Arts) as measured by the Smarter Balanced Assessment.&nbsp; Research, comparing and contrasting information as well as analysis of text and data are Social Studies skills that will be used in this unit.&nbsp; The development of counterarguments through reading and research are also skills that can be applied in these lessons and are directly used in the SBA.</p>
<p>While students begin to study the continent of Africa, there are many opportunities to extend learning beyond what is listed in the curriculum.&nbsp; These opportunities for extended learning are also important to accurately understand history, the development of people, America and Africa (focusing on South Africa).&nbsp; Most importantly this will allow for an in-depth study of Apartheid in South Africa.</p>
<p>Students should have experiences that are interconnected, as opposed to learning experiences that are often separated historically&mdash;by time period or continents. When learning experiences are connected, students are more likely to make deeper, brain-valuable learning transactions.&nbsp; When students internalize learning about a topic as rich as Apartheid, it builds their &ldquo;toolboxes&rdquo; to become increasingly civic minded or perhaps influence them to become leaders or influencers in their local communities.&nbsp; The development of students into good citizens is often practiced in classrooms.&nbsp; However, it is the hope of teachers that students will become responsible citizens of the world-- making solid, informed decisions in a culturally diverse society and ever-changing world.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Students should be able to demonstrate civic competence by understanding how government works.&nbsp; Understanding the difficulties and processes of government are areas our students are expected to demonstrate mastery in.&nbsp; This is also an area that I have found that students have also shown deficits in.&nbsp; The connections and inter-workings of our communities as they relate to the states, our country and the world are important.</p>
<p>Many well-known current or past activists that students have studied&mdash;whether on the continent of America or Africa are male. This is who students are familiar with.&nbsp; It is necessary to teach with balance and explore the roles of women in all disciplines.&nbsp; However, when students study the continent of Africa women who took leadership roles or were involved in the Anti-Apartheid and Civil Rights Movement are often overlooked.&nbsp; In a time where gender recognition is becoming more of a focus, it is important for educators to ensure there is balanced instruction. One key piece of information that would be valuable from this set of lessons is to learn about the impact of those involved in struggle against Apartheid &ndash; inclusive of women, youth and others.</p>
<p>Social studies as well as the components of geography and history involve the study of the physical location or place, climate, temperature, history, economics, politics, culture, people etc.&nbsp; It is vital that students know about individuals who but took large steps forward to help pave the way in Africa and in turn, helped the country transition from and through Apartheid.&nbsp; You may find in your lessons and classroom discussions that the student may question whether or not Apartheid has actually ended.</p>
<p>&ldquo;The conqueror writes history, they came, they conquered, and they write. You don&rsquo;t expect the people who came to invade us to tell the truth about us...&rdquo;</p>
<p>&mdash; Miriam Makeba South African singer and civil rights activist</p>
<h2>Purpose</h2>
<p>The purpose of the unit is to give students an in-depth understanding of life in South Africa during Apartheid as well as women who helped to fight against the system of Apartheid.&nbsp; While the unit will look at all leaders, there will be a small focus on women who were played key roles during that time period.&nbsp; Students study Sub-Saharan Africa as part of New Haven Public School&rsquo;s curriculum.&nbsp; However, this has been done often without excavating details about pivotal historical events like Apartheid and its impact.&nbsp; Students need to make the connections between learning chunks of information so that they can make meaning of it and eventually apply it to their social or educational lives.&nbsp; Additionally, students will look at the parallels between life for African Americans during America&rsquo;s Civil Rights Movement, which is another area that I found my students have demonstrated deficits in.</p>
<p>The unit will be interwoven during several months of the year beginning in late December and ending in March, which is also Women&rsquo;s History month.&nbsp; The patterns, movements and growth of society through cultural and political developments as well as the impact of historical and cultural events and their influences on today&rsquo;s society will also be discussed.</p>
<p>In working with my students, I observed that their level of understanding and knowledge of basic social studies concepts was lacking.&nbsp; It is important that students understand the world that they live in and their place in it.&nbsp; Through Social Studies classes students need to be able to identify the world&rsquo;s major cultural, political and historical events in addition to continents and oceans.&nbsp; They must understand world history&mdash;ground-breaking history and advances that have been led by women or supported by women.&nbsp; Students must have the chance to weave layers of historical fabric into a blanket that is not full of holes.&nbsp; Learning about these women will excite my students because much of the history they will learn about does not exist already in their social studies textbooks.</p>
<p>One particularly important focus for the set of lessons is the contributions to the anti-apartheid movement by women&hellip; Thus it is necessary to bring a balance to students&rsquo; knowledge base.&nbsp; I have observed that many middle students are not sure where the continent of Africa is located.&nbsp; However, when they begin to study Africa and Africans their learning is focused on Egypt or ancient Egypt. Those are vital and important lessons to show the development of civilization by ancient peoples during that time.&nbsp; The struggles of the people on the continent of Africa have been many and have been complex and still are many and still are complex.&nbsp; For students, the continent of Africa must be more than studying the ancient Egyptians.&nbsp; They must see the development of black Africans as well as the connections to America via the slave trade route and a jump down the timeline so that there is a comparison to the experiences of African Americans in the United States of America.&nbsp; There must be a purposeful connection so that the history of&nbsp; South Africa&rsquo;s Apartheid and America&rsquo;s Jim Crow Era and Civil Rights Movement come to life from the pages of any of the text they read or words they hear through various forms to media.</p>
<p>Learning and teaching about women and their roles in society --whether it be through the lenses of economics, politics or others, must be done so that students can see themselves or family members (mothers, sisters, aunts, etc.) represented in history, which will in turn affect their futures and careers.&nbsp; I think my students learn best when they experience and &ldquo;discover.&rdquo; &nbsp;In today&rsquo;s world it is important that students understand the history&mdash;ground-breaking history and advances that have been led by women or supported by women.&nbsp; Some supports were in the background like the women of color who were brought to the forefront of NASA&rsquo;s space expeditions through their revolutionary mathematical formulas to support and lift the space industry off the ground and into the stars.&nbsp; Many would not know about their work and how science and math intertwined if there had not been a specific spotlight or focus on their work, which was impactful beyond space.</p>
<p>The same holds true for this unit&rsquo;s look into social justice and human rights on the continent of Africa as well as in the United States.&nbsp; Information like this may only be discovered through mindful research and purposeful planning to continue to bring depth to our Social Studies curriculum.</p>
<p>About the Unit</p>
<ul>
<li>Students will learn about Apartheid (and study the political/economics/meaning).</li>
<li>Students will identify, examine and analyze the start and the end of Apartheid.</li>
<li>Students will analyze whether forms of Apartheid exist in South Africa or other parts of the world today.</li>
<li>Students will learn about the continent of Africa its geography, history and culture.</li>
<li>Students will learn about African women who fought against/were impacted by Apartheid as well as their impact on the world.</li>
<li>Students will research, identify and analyze African women who were or are political leaders or cultural leaders</li>
<li>Students will analyze and discuss the effects of colonization</li>
<li>Students will identify and analyze the characteristics of oppressive systems</li>
<li>Students will identify oppressive systems in the world</li>
<li>Students will compare South Africa&rsquo;s Apartheid to America&rsquo;s Jim Crow Era/Civil Rights Movement</li>
<li>Students will identify the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary sources and use them</li>
<li>Students will compare the Soweto Massacre to killings of people in America (past and present including Black Lives Matter Movement)</li>
</ul>
<p><strong>Enduring understandings:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>Individuals, groups of people and societies have had and continue to experience the denial of basic human rights</li>
<li>Oppression (social, political and economic) and denial of human rights impacts society</li>
<li>The correlation between life in South Africa for Africans during Apartheid from 1948 to the 1990s and the African American from the Jim Crow time period to Reconstruction in 1877 and the Civil Rights Movement.</li>
</ol>
<h2><strong>Women in the Anti-Apartheid Movement</strong></h2>
<p>Students will look at the lives of the following women:</p>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td>
<p>Albertina Sisulu (born Nontsikelelo Thethiwe) in 1918 Transkei/ Eastern Cape Province</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Helen Joseph was an anti-apartheid activist born in England but moved to South Africa</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Miriam Makeba &ndash; born in Johannesburg, singer political activist</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Sandra Laing (a woman of color born to white parents in South Africa)</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Helen Suzman, white South African legislator and opponent of Apartheid</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Nadine Gordimer a South African writer, 1991 Nobel Prize winner, fierce political activist against Apartheid</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Caroline Hunter, an American chemist who was working for Polaroid and discovered their role in Apartheid.&nbsp; The company actually made the passbooks used for the Apartheid system in Africa.&nbsp; She and a partner working at Polaroid and formed the Polaroid Workers Revolutionary Movement.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Ruth First &ndash; white journalist and Anti-Apartheid activist, who spent 117 days in jail.&nbsp; She was eventually murdered because of her beliefs.&nbsp; She was held under the 90-day clause which allowed people to be held for 90 days without cause.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Naomi Tutu &ndash; Daughter of Bishop Desmond Tutu; human rights activist</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Winnie Mandela &ndash; wife of Nelson Mandela, activist for anti-Apartheid movement; also convicted of crimes</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<h2>Women in the Civil Rights Movement</h2>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td>
<p>The Rev. Dr. Anna Pauline &ldquo;Pauli&rdquo; Murray &ndash; a lawyer, civil rights activist, and Episcopal priest whose writings were used in the 1954 Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, the 1954 Supreme Court</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Mamie Till Mobley &ndash; mother of Emmett Till who sparked part of the Civil Rights Movement in her actions after the death of her son in Mississippi.</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Diane Nash - Freedom Rider and Nonviolent Student Activist</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Ella Baker- civil rights leader and mentor to W.E.B. Dubois, Rosa Parks, Thurgood Marshall and Martin Luther King, Jr. She is known as leader and movement creator</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Septima Poinsette Clark &ndash; teacher; known as the &ldquo;Mother of the American Civil Rights Movement,&rdquo;</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Fannie Lou Hamer - co-founded the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in 1964; in 1965 ran for Congress in Mississippi.</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p><strong>What is Apartheid? </strong></p>
<p>Apartheid is an oppressive, systemic process the purposely created two separate systems for black and whites in South Africa during 1948 &ndash; until the early 1990s.&nbsp; This system of racism allowed the government to put blacks and white, anti-Apartheid supporters in jail without evidence or probable cause.&nbsp; While the official date for the end of Apartheid is given during 1990, many of practices and injustices carried on far beyond that date.&nbsp; There are striking similarities to Apartheid in South Africa and the Civil Rights Movement in America.&nbsp; Apartheid most resembles the Jim Crow Era in America with its passbooks in South Africa and on the opposite side the The Green Book for negro (black) travelers in America.&nbsp; The contrast is that the passbooks used during Apartheid gave permission for black Africans to travel between cities or townships during certain hours and the Green Book held important information to that let black travelers know the, stores, gas stations, places and highways that safely accommodated them.</p>
<p><strong>Question student should consider during this unit</strong></p>
<ul>
<li>Are human rights a right/Are they guaranteed?</li>
<li>Who enforces human rights?</li>
<li>What or who determines the value of an individual&rsquo;s life?</li>
<li>What are the differences between the lives of men and women in Africa/South Africa?</li>
<li>How might Apartheid compare/connect to Nazism?</li>
<li>Who is Bram Fischer?</li>
<li>How did the Rivonia Trial impact South Africa?</li>
<li>What is the difference between Afrikaans and Afrikaner?</li>
<li>How have the Jewish people impacted anti-Apartheid and Civil Rights movements?</li>
<li>What is Hendrik Verwoerd&rsquo;s impact on South Africa/Apartheid?</li>
<li>How is lasting political and societal change created?</li>
<li>Why is history important and what can we learn from it?</li>
<li>Does history repeat itself?</li>
<li>How might the Holocaust be compared to Apartheid and the Jim Crow Era/Civil Rights Era (not to be confused with the actual Civil Rights Movement).</li>
<li>What are the factors that impact and shape history?</li>
<li>What impacts and shapes politics?</li>
<li>How did the &ldquo;end of the Apartheid&rdquo; impact race relations? How might you compare this to America&rsquo;s issues with race and Black Lives Matter?</li>
<li>What were the factors of Apartheid besides government involvement?</li>
<li>Who are/were the Freedom Riders and how did they impact society?</li>
<li>How did the Sharpeville Massacre impact society?</li>
<li>Is violence a means to an end? Does violence bring results?</li>
<li>What is divestment as it relates to South African Apartheid?</li>
<li>How are history, politics and economics interconnected?</li>
<li>What is the African National Congress?</li>
<li>How did the African National Congress impact South Africa and the world?</li>
<li>What is the impact of women on the Anti-apartheid Movement?</li>
<li>What is the impact of women on the Civil Rights Movement?</li>
<li>Was Winne Mandela a positive influence on behalf of the anti-Apartheid movement?</li>
<li>If Anti-Apartheid laws were enforced in your neighborhood or in the state of Connecticut how would your life change?</li>
<li>What is racism?</li>
<li>How does racism impact the individual, society/the world, genders and cultures?</li>
<li>What are the characteristics of racism?</li>
<li>How are communities of color different from white communities?&nbsp;</li>
<li>How are the bush communities different from cities and villages in Africa?</li>
</ul>
<h2>Unit Activities and Key Components</h2>
<p>Beginning the Unit &ndash; Hook / Anticipatory Set</p>
<p>Hook/Do Now/Anticipatory Set: matching the quotes and stories of African women with their names.&nbsp; This activity will spark students&rsquo; interest.</p>
<p>Knowledge Brain Dump: Have students write a brain map or list everything that they know about Civil Rights.&nbsp; Next have students write everything they know about Africa.&nbsp; This is a twist on the KWL (Know, Want to Know and Learn) chart that students are often asked to do at the beginning of a lesson to determine their knowledge base before beginning a lesson.&nbsp; The KWL chart allows students to list <em>what they know</em>; <em>what they want to know</em> and after completing lessons or the unit&mdash;students then return to the document to write <em>what they have learned</em>.&nbsp; You may also wish to use this as a graphic organizer for students who need it as the KWL will allow them to see their actual progression of learning from the beginning of the until through the end.</p>
<p>Word Houdini: You can also ask students to guess what the word Apartheid means.&nbsp; Their answers would be written on paper or on a white board.&nbsp; You can have students work in pairs.&nbsp; The addition of a timer can make it a game or race.</p>
<p>Extended Hook Activity: Modified simulation of special passes with certain privileges during certain times of the day/ certain days of the week.&nbsp; Students will go through this simulation for approximately one week and write a journal or create an online blog posted on Google classroom.</p>
<p>True Story Narratives - One of the easiest ways to introduce students to new learning is to read stories and ask students to give their reactions to the events via white board, small discussion group or oral report out.</p>
<p>Headline History True or False: The teacher will choose headlines during 1948 &ndash; 1994 (The early 90&rsquo;s which began the end of Apartheid.)&nbsp; This particular activity will spark students&rsquo; interest and excitement and should be given at least 30 minutes of class time.</p>
<p><em>Beginning the Lesson &ndash; Simulation Activities</em></p>
<p>RAFT cards: These cards can be used as a discussion topic card or a writing card. The R(role), A (audience), F (format) and T (topic). These cards can be given as students walk into the room and they can be introduced to a situation that may have occurred during South African apartheid times or during the Jim Crow era and civil rights movement in America. As students are given these cards as they walk into the classroom, they will begin the activity based on your desire for either a quick write to be done or quick discussion or &ldquo;turn n talk&rdquo; to happen. The cards can be used by individual students, in pairs or with small groups given one card each. RAFT cards can be used for debates or even as a research prompt.</p>
<p>Time Machine Activity: This activity will allow students to experience life during apartheid or the Jim Crow era &ndash; students will be given a set of rules that they have to function/live by. Students will be asked to document their feelings regarding the activity either in writing or using short video snippets. Allowing the use of video or the choice to write helps to differentiate the activity and meet student interests.</p>
<p>Telling stories and Questioning: Using stories about African Women who were/are leaders &ndash; students will read stories&mdash;some of which will be shared with students by the teacher.&nbsp; In a Socratic seminar-like format students ask questions, then log their questions and peers&rsquo; questions.&nbsp; Questions and possible answers and evidence should be discussed.&nbsp; Evidence from their readings to support possible answers or theories should be cited.&nbsp; Students will also use those questions to help drive their research.&nbsp; The addition of questioning to the &ldquo;Telling Stories&rdquo; activities is in alignment with the goals of New Haven Public Schools.&nbsp; Questioning is one of the Problems of Instructional Practice (POIP) for the district.</p>
<p>Comparison and Contrasting: Chart or create a product that contains how the Apartheid and the Civil Rights Movement/Jim Crow Era were similar and different. This activity will require Depth of Knowledge (Karen Hess).&nbsp; Activity should be done near the end of the lessons/unit.</p>
<p>Writing and Journaling Activities:&nbsp;</p>
<p>Topic:&nbsp; Imagine that you are living during the time when Apartheid officially ends.&nbsp; Describe what your life is like over the course of several days/journal entries.&nbsp; Use evidence to support from the resources you have studied, read or viewed.</p>
<p>Topic: After sharing a story or article about a particular woman being studied in the unit.&nbsp; Students are to write a &ldquo;A day in the life of&rdquo; diary entry, assuming the identity of that woman.</p>
<p>Topic: Use a world event or current event/crisis.&nbsp; Discuss the facts of the event without student opinions&mdash;discuss for understanding.&nbsp; Allow students to ask questions; formulate their questions on stickies.&nbsp; Next, ask students to write about how that person would handle the issue, event or conflict. assuming the identity of that woman.</p>
<p>Quote interpretations:&nbsp; Students can be given quotes to interpret in writing or their journals and or spark peer-to-peer, whole class or small group conversations.</p>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;Thus in South Africa it is very expensive to be poor. It is the poor people who stay furthest from town and therefore have to spend more money on transport to come and work for white people; it is the poor people who use uneconomic and inconvenient fuel like paraffin and coal because of the refusal of the white man to install electricity in black areas; it is the poor people who are governed by many ill-defined restrictive laws and therefore have to spend money on fines for 'technical' offences; it is the poor people who have no hospitals and are therefore exposed to exorbitant charges by private doctors; it is the poor people who use untarred roads, have to walk long distances, and therefore experience the greatest wear and tear on commodities like shoes; it is the poor people who have to pay for their children's books while whites get them free.&rdquo; - by Bantu Stephen Biko, I Write What I Like:</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>"The most potent weapon in the hands of the oppressor is the mind of the oppressed.&rdquo; -by Bantu Stephen Biko</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>I am not sorry. I will never be sorry. I would do everything I did again if I had to. Everything. &nbsp;-by Winnie Madikizela-Mandela</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;I dream of an Africa which is in peace with itself.&rdquo; - by Nelson Mandela</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;If you want to make peace with your enemy, you have to work with your enemy. Then he becomes your partner.&rdquo; - by Nelson Mandela</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;Women are the people who are going to relieve us from all this oppression and depression. The rent boycott that is happening in Soweto now is alive because of the women. It is the women who are on the street committees educating the people to stand up and protect each other." &nbsp;by Albertina Sisulu</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;If you talk to a man in a language he understands, that goes to his head. If you talk to him in his language, that goes to his heart.&rdquo;- by Nelson Mandela</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p>&ldquo;As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.&rdquo;- by Nelson Mandela</p></blockquote>
<p><strong>Whole-Class lessons</strong> (Students can also be assessed during the following lessons.):</p>
<p>Create a timeline - Develop a timeline of America and South African Apartheid -This activity can take many different formats.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Museum walk/Gallery walk - The is activity can be done as a with students working teams or cooperative groupings.&nbsp; Students chose or are given a section of time in to compare using the time in America and the time in South Africa.&nbsp; This can be a creative activity for students who may design their time frame which must meet certain requirements.&nbsp; Students can help develop a project rubric during a whole class activity.&nbsp; Participation in rubric development fosters &ldquo;buy in&rdquo; and allows students to become familiar with assignment expectations.</p>
<p>Debate<strong>: </strong>Human Rights and Apartheid &ndash; In this debate students will use the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to discuss pro and con arguments using &ldquo;articles&rdquo; from the Universal Declaration of the Human Rights as well as research developed through peer work.&nbsp; Students will participate weekly research sessions and keep an active notebook. &nbsp;Possible Debate Topics:</p>
<h2>Assessments:</h2>
<p>The Goal: Students will also research the role of women and others in the area of politics and culture and show their impact on South Africa, other parts of Africa and the rest of the world.&nbsp;</p>
<ul>
<li>Checks for understanding</li>
<li>How might we react to Apartheid today? Students will a paper discussing how people living today would have reacted to Apartheid and cite sources from class readings and their own research.</li>
<li>This is a suggested assessment that will allow students to demonstrate their knowledge. In addition to teacher created written tests and quizzes students can create <strong><em>a wax theater</em></strong>.&nbsp; Students will choose the women who were leaders and tell their stories and impact on society.&nbsp; Students can choose to portray the women, be &ldquo;wax&rdquo; new commentators who will share the news or important events involving the African women and important historical and political events in African history. &nbsp;This event can be used as an opportunity to <em>engage parents and community members</em>.</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Students can choose important historical or political events in South African history, Apartheid and <em>design a CD or digital playlist of music</em> (playlist or actual hard CD or digital playlist). Students may chose to focus on the individuals that they learned about in this unit.&nbsp; In other words, students would choose the songs that they feel explain the life, accomplishments or impact on society.&nbsp; They would get a chance to tell the leader&rsquo;s or the event&rsquo;s story.&nbsp; Students will also <em>design a CD cover</em>.&nbsp; Students must cite evidence/explain in writing why they have chosen each song or track using facts (proof) from their research and readings. <em>(Citing evidence is a skill that will be measured by the Smarter Balanced Assessment.)</em></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Museum Curator Activity: Students can choose a piece of artwork or create a picture (using an medium) that they feel represents important events involving African female leaders or important historical and political events in African history. Students must cite evidence/explain in writing why they have chosen to use the piece of art that they have found or created to represent the event related to apartheid, other political events or female African leaders (whether African or South African).</li>
</ul>
<h2>Key Vocabulary/ Terms/ Places</h2>
<p>assassination, interrogation, segregation, African National Congress, South African National Congress, apartheid &nbsp; divestment, liberation&nbsp; Johannesburg, Soweto&nbsp; Hendrik Verwoerd, Activist&nbsp; colonization, civil rights&nbsp; civil rights movement, The Negro Motorist Green Book, human rights, passbook&nbsp; mixed marriage, Boers, Afrikaner</p>
<h2>Distance Learning Opportunities&nbsp;</h2>
<p>Given the recent developments with Coronavirus and the possibility of quarantines and learning from home for students, it is wise to consider several ways to teach aspects of this unit via distance learning.&nbsp; Listed below are activities or tools you may wish to develop should the need arise for virtual learning.</p>
<ul>
<li>Google Whole-class Class PowerPoints</li>
<li>Zoom discussions/breakout rooms/polls</li>
<li>Vocaroo (voice recording to allow students to record answers)</li>
<li>Kahoot games</li>
<li>Flipgrid</li>
<li>NearPod</li>
<li>Run and Find Games linked to class discussions &ndash; Students run and find and object that relates to the theme or topic of discussion.</li>
<li>Question and answer sessions</li>
</ul>
<p>Teacher to Class</p>
<p>Student to Class</p>
<p>Student to Student</p>
<h2>RESOURCES / READINGS:</h2>
<ul>
<li>Cry Freedom /Rated PG 1987 &middot; Biography &middot; 2h 37m</li>
<li>NOVEL <em>- Journey to Jo&rsquo;Burg: A South African Story</em> by Beverly Naidoo - <em>This book is a quick read and should be an anchor book that all classes/students must read.</em>&nbsp; (The reading of novels is beneficial to students.&nbsp; Reading and writing across the disciplines helps those skills become transferred to the subject of Social Studies/History.&nbsp; Note: Often students only feel like reading and writing take place in a Reading or English Language Arts / ELA class.)</li>
<li>NOVEL - <em>The Road to Memphis </em>by Mildred D. Taylor &ndash; will give the experience of Blacks/African Americans living in the south during the time of Jim Crow and segregation.&nbsp; This novel can be chunked and used for classroom discussions.&nbsp; This novel will unfold what life was like during the time period.</li>
<li>NOVEL <em>- Leon&rsquo;s Story</em> by Leon Walter Tillage and Susan L. Roth &ndash; This book is another short read which gives the story of the life of a young boy growing up in North Carolina and the struggles he faced. Tillage, now deceased, was a custodian and school and decided to have a book written about his life.&nbsp; This is extremely useful in order to begin to have students understand what life was like in America.&nbsp; This novel is an easy, brief read for struggling readers and can be used as a teacher led read aloud for students on grade-level as well.&nbsp; The importance is that is helps to set the stage of understanding for students.</li>
<li>NOVEL - <em>Cry, the Beloved Country</em> by Alan Paton &ndash; Is novel for higher-level students or those at a high school level.&nbsp; The teacher may choose to chunk reading from the critical novel released in 1948.</li>
<li>Extended Reading NOVEL -&nbsp; <em>&nbsp;Coconut</em> by Kopano Matlwa This book talks about live for a blacks in what is considered &ldquo;the New South Africa.&rdquo;&nbsp; The book was the European Union Literary Award winner.</li>
<li>The Baltimore Sun Article&nbsp; <em>- &ldquo;Leon's story For years, custodian Leon Tillage told Park School students his heart-rending story of growing up in the segregated South. Now, his tales have become an acclaimed children's story -- and a lesson in the vagaries of memory.&rdquo;</em>&nbsp; https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1997-11-23-1997327157-story.html</li>
<li>NOVEL <em>- (BIOGRAPHY) Nelson Mandela: No Easy Walk to Freedom </em>(Scholastic Biography) by Barry Denenberg</li>
<li>NOVEL <em>- My Son's Story</em> by Nadine Gordimer</li>
<li>NOVEL - Together We're Strong: The Story of Albertina Sisulu by Liesl Jobson, Alice Toich, Nazli Jacobs</li>
<li>ARTICLE Smithsonian Magazine (online)&ndash; &ldquo; A Look Back at South Africa Under Apartheid, Twenty-Five Years After Its Repeal &ldquo; https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-did-apartheid-south-africa-look-180956945/</li>
<li>ARTICLE &ndash; City Beat (Online) Growing Up Under Apartheid: Daughter of famed archbishop comes to town <br/> https://www.citybeat.com/news/article/13012319/growing-up-under-apartheid <br/>This link also offers and audio version of the article</li>
<li><em>New York Times Article</em> from the Tsakane Journal; Apartheid Still Burdens A Girl Who Didn't Fit.&rdquo; https://www.nytimes.com/2000/06/10/world/tsakane-journal-apartheid-still-burdens-a-girl-who-didn-t-fit.html</li>
<li><em>NY Times &ldquo;End of Apartheid in South Africa? Not in Economic Terms: Political liberation has yet to translate into material gains for blacks. &ldquo;&nbsp; </em>https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/24/business/south-africa-economy-apartheid.html</li>
<li><em>VIDEO clip History Channel</em><strong> &ndash; </strong>This video takes a look at the restrictions of Apartheid through the experiences of Nelson Mandela&nbsp; https://www.history.com/topics/africa/apartheid</li>
<li>&nbsp;VIDEO - Miriam Makeba Interview 1969 (Approximately 8 mins. ) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wONkMpbl7N8</li>
<li>https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pc0GqSHiXH0&amp;feature=emb_logo</li>
<li>VIDEO - Civil Rights Movement in America - Standing Up For Freedom on the Learning Videos Channel (17 minutes) https://youtu.be/C0JJHZUUAJU</li>
<li>VIDEO - CNN: SNCC's legacy: A civil rights history - This video allows students to look at protests by college students who began the sit-ins, which in turn sparked participation in the civil rights movement. https://youtu.be/QZE0a5-p9pg</li>
<li>VIDEO - Civil Rights protests of Birmingham, Alabama https://youtu.be/urJsz2jtPtU</li>
<li>&nbsp;VIDEO - Civilians protest against government laws and apartheid policies in South Africa. HD Stock Footage&nbsp; https://youtu.be/CLeHWppWGDg</li>
<li>VIDEO - Polaroid &amp; Apartheid: Inside the Beginnings of the Boycott, Divestment Movement Against South Africa&nbsp; (16 minutes) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nXVSdqnCl5k</li>
<li>VIDEO- South Africa in the Apartheid Era https://study.com/academy/lesson/south-africa-in-the-apartheid-era.html</li>
<li><em>Life stories/Non-fiction </em>articles about women, major and minor figures in Apartheid (with some articles about America&rsquo;s Civil Rights Movement, events and leaders)</li>
</ul>
<p><em>&nbsp;</em></p>
<h2>TEACHER RESOURCES /READING</h2>
<ul>
<li>&nbsp;MOVIE - History Channel - Miracle Rising South Africa [ Full Movie ]&nbsp; Approximately (1:32 minutes) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IKDrRdfvUg8 <br/> This film is a necessary view to give teachers background on the system of Apartheid.&nbsp; This movie, produced by the History Channel recounts the progression of South Africa out of Apartheid moving from Apartheid&nbsp; up through the &ldquo;first free and fair elections&rdquo; of April 1994.&nbsp; The personal narratives and personal accounts of key figures are shared.</li>
<li><em>ARTICLE Smithsonian Magazine (online)&ndash;</em> &ldquo; A Look Back at South Africa Under Apartheid, Twenty-Five Years After Its Repeal &ldquo; https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-did-apartheid-south-africa-look-180956945/</li>
<li><em>Audio/Radio BBC</em> Witness History Radio show: &ldquo;The Assassination of Ruth First&rdquo; by letter/parcel bomb&nbsp; https://www.bbc.co.uk/sounds/play/p00wmgv1</li>
<li>NOVEL-<em>RESOURCE Now is Your Time! The African-American Struggle for Freedom, </em>by Walter Dean Meyers</li>
<li><em>The 1619 Project (For background information on slavery and the American timeline)</em></li>
<li>NOVEL <em>- Nervous Conditions (Nervous Conditions #1) </em>by Tsitsi Dangarembga<em> &ndash; This novel is a good read for the teacher and can be shared in chunks with students.&nbsp; The politics of decolonization, women's rights, race, gender, class and cultural shifts and change are discussed in this novel.</em></li>
<li>&nbsp;PLAY - Ruth First: 117 Days This short clip is an adaptation of Ruth First&rsquo;s 1956 novel, Ruth First: 117 days.&nbsp; First was a journalist and activist against Apartheid who incarcerated under Apartheid&rsquo;s 90-day clause.&nbsp; The play is Directed by Marcel Meyer https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Xu1x2wOEIk</li>
<li>ARTICLE &ndash; LA Times &ldquo;Winnie Mandela Is Sentenced to 6 Years in Prison&rdquo;&nbsp; https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1991-05-15-mn-1715-story.html&nbsp;</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>ARTICLE New York Times &ldquo;&nbsp; Winnie Mandela's Ex-Bodyguard Tells of Killings She Ordered &rdquo; https://www.nytimes.com/1997/12/04/world/winnie-mandela-s-ex-bodyguard-tells-of-killings-she-ordered.html</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>&nbsp;The Ruth First Papers Project https://www.ruthfirstpapers.org.uk/&nbsp; (This site is rich with images and journals and articles written by Ruth First.)</li>
</ul>
<h2>Appendix on Implementing District Standards</h2>
<p>Curriculum Standards</p>
<p><em>Common Core State Standards</em> (also known as the CONNECTICUT CORE STATE STANDARDS)</p>
<ul>
<li>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.4 - Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including vocabulary specific to domains related to history/social studies.</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.5 - Describe how a text presents information (e.g., sequentially, comparatively, causally).</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.6 - Identify aspects of a text that reveal an author&rsquo;s point of view or purpose (e.g., loaded language, inclusion or avoidance of particular facts).</li>
</ul>
<table border="1">
<tr>
<td>
<p>CCSS. ELA-LITERACY</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Grade 6 Standards</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Grade 7 Standards</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Key Ideas and Details:</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.6.1 -Cite textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.7.1- (Cite several pieces of textual evidence)</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>RI.6.2 -Determine a central idea of a text and how it is conveyed through particular details; provide a summary of the text distinct from personal opinions or judgments.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.7.2 -Determine two or more central ideas in a text and analyze their development over the course of the text&hellip;</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td></td>
<td>
<p>RI.6.3 -Analyze in detail how a key individual, event, or idea is introduced, illustrated, and elaborated in a text (e.g., through examples or anecdotes).</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.7.3 -Analyze the interactions between individuals, events, and ideas in a text (e.g., how ideas influence individuals or events, or how individuals influence ideas or events)</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Integration of Knowledge and Ideas:</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.6.7 -Integrate information presented in different media or formats (e.g., visually, quantitatively) as well as in words to develop a coherent understanding of a topic or issue.</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>RI.7.7-Compare and contrast a text to an audio, video, or multimedia version of the text, analyzing each medium's portrayal of the subject (e.g., how the delivery of a speech affects the impact of the words).</p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p><em>&nbsp;</em></p>
<p><em>NCSS &ndash; The 10 Themes of Social Studies</em></p>
<ol>
<li>
    Culture.
    <ul>
    <li>Human beings create, learn, share, and adapt to culture.</li>
    <li>Cultures are dynamic and change over time.</li>
    <li>Through experience, observation, and reflection, students will identify elements of culture as well as similarities and differences among cultural groups across time and place.</li>
    <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units and courses dealing with geography, history, sociology, and anthropology, as well as multicultural topics across the curriculum.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Time, Continuity, and Change
    <ul>
    <li>Studying the past makes it possible for us to understand the human story across time.</li>
    <li>Knowledge and understanding of the past enable us to analyze the causes and consequences of events and developments, and to place these in the context of the institutions, values and beliefs of the periods in which they took place.</li>
    <li>Knowing how to read, reconstruct and interpret the past allows us to answer questions</li>
    <li>Through a more formal study of history, students in the middle grades continue to expand their understanding of the past and are increasingly able to apply the research methods associated with historical inquiry.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>People, Places, and Environments
    <ul>
    <li>The study of people, places, and environments enables us to understand the relationship between human populations and the physical world.</li>
    <li>During their studies, learners develop an understanding of spatial perspectives, and examine changes in the relationship between peoples, places and environments.</li>
    <li>Today&rsquo;s social, cultural, economic and civic issues demand that students apply knowledge, skills, and understandings as they address questions</li>
    <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units and courses dealing with geography, regional studies, and world cultures.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Individual Development and Identity
    <ul>
    <li>Personal identity is shaped by an individual&rsquo;s culture, by groups, by institutional influences, and by lived experiences shared with people inside and outside the individual&rsquo;s own culture throughout her or his development.</li>
    <li>The study of individual development and identity will help students to describe factors important to the development of personal identity.</li>
    <li>In the early grades, young learners develop their personal identities in the context of families, peers, schools, and communities.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Individuals, Groups, and Institutions
    <ul>
    <li>Institutions are the formal and informal political, economic, and social organizations that help us carry out, organize, and manage our daily affairs.</li>
    <li>It is important that students know how institutions are formed, what controls and influences them, how they control and influence individuals and culture, and how institutions can be maintained or changed.</li>
    <li>Students identify those institutions that they encounter.</li>
    <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units and courses dealing with sociology, anthropology, psychology, political science, and history.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Power, Authority, and Governance
    <ul>
        <li>The development of civic competence requires an understanding of the foundations of political thought, and the historical development of various structures of power, authority, and governance. It also requires knowledge of the evolving functions of these structures in contemporary U.S. society, as well as in other parts of the world.</li>
        <li>In exploring this theme, students confront questions such as:
            <ul>
                <li>What are the purposes and functions of government?</li>
                <li>Under what circumstances is the exercise of political power legitimate?</li>
                <li>What are the proper scope and limits of authority?</li>
                <li>How are individual rights protected and challenged within the context of majority rule?</li>
                <li>What conflicts exist among fundamental principles and values of constitutional democracy?</li>
                <li>What are the rights and responsibilities of citizens in a constitutional democracy?</li>
            </ul>
        </li>
        <li>Through study of the dynamic relationships between individual rights and responsibilities, the needs of social groups, and concepts of a just society, learners become more effective problem-solvers and decision-makers when addressing the persistent issues and social problems encountered in public life.</li>
        <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units and courses dealing with government, politics, political science, civics, history, law, and other social sciences.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Production, Distribution, and Consumption
    <ul>
    <li>In exploring this theme, students confront such questions as:
        <ul>
        <li>How does interdependence brought on by globalization, impact local economies and social systems?</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units and courses dealing with concepts, principles, and issues drawn from the discipline of economics.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Science, Technology, and Society
    <ul>
    <li>Science, and its practical application, technology, have had a major influence on social and cultural change, and on the ways people interact with the world.</li>
    <li>There are many questions about the role that science and technology play in our lives and in our cultures</li>
    <li>This theme appears in units or courses dealing with history, geography, economics, and civics and government.</li>
    <li>Analyses of the costs and benefits of increased global connections, and evaluations of the tensions between national interests and global priorities, contribute to the development of possible solutions to persistent and emerging global issues.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Global Connections
    <ul>
    <li>Global connections have intensified and accelerated the changes faced at the local, national, and international levels.</li>
    <li>In exploring this theme, students confront questions such as:
        <ul>
        <li>What are the different types of global connections?</li>
        <li>What global connections have existed in the past, exist currently, and are likely in the future?</li>
        <li>How do ideas spread between societies in today&rsquo;s interconnected world? How does this result in change in those societies?</li>
        <li>What are the other consequences of global connections? What are the benefits and problems associated with global interdependence?</li>
        <li>How might people in different parts of the world have different perspectives on these benefits and problems?</li>
        <li>How should people and societies balance global connectedness with local needs?</li>
        <li>What is needed for life to thrive on an ever changing and increasingly interdependent planet?</li>
        </ul>
    </li>
    <li>This theme typically appears in units or courses dealing with geography, culture, economics, history, political science, government, and technology but may also draw upon the natural and physical sciences and the humanities, including literature, the arts, and languages.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
<li>Civic Ideals and Practices
    <ul>
    <li>An understanding of civic ideals and practices is critical to full participation in society and is an essential component of education for citizenship, which is the central purpose of social studies.</li>
    <li>Learning how to apply civic ideals as part of citizen action is essential to the exercise of democratic freedoms and the pursuit of the common good.</li>
    <li>In schools, this theme typically appears in units or courses dealing with civics, history, political science, cultural anthropology, and fields such as global studies and law-related education, while also drawing upon content from the humanities.</li>
    </ul>
</li>
</ol>
<h2>Bibliography</h2>
<p>American Experience. &ldquo;Eyes on The Prize (Part 1): Awakenings 1954-1956 Americas Civil Rights Movement.&rdquo; July 21, 2016. Accessed April 20, 2020. YouTube Video, 49:55. https://youtu.be/NpY2NVcO17U. Part one of this documentary covers the historic Supreme Court Case Brown vs. The Board of Education, desegregation, Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus Boycotts, the story of Emmett Till, and more.</p>
<p>American Experience. &ldquo;Eyes on The Prize (Part 2): Fighting Back 1957 1962 Americas Civil Rights Movement.&rdquo; December 3, 2017. Accessed April 20, 2020. YouTube Video, 1:08:42. https://youtu.be/3bb76CK3Cwc. Part two of this documentary covers the Little Rock Nine and their work to desegregate Arkansas&rsquo; Central High School, the integration of Autherine Lucy into the University of Alabama, who was eventually expelled by the Board of Directors after she won a case against them.</p>
<p>American Experience. &ldquo;Eyes on The Prize (Part 3): Ain't Scared of Your Jails (1960-1961) Americas Civil Rights Movement.&rdquo; Jul 22, 2016. Accessed April 22, 2020. YouTube Video, 55:11. https://youtu.be/aXG9lqr6qk4?list=PLfUJ8lTZUqUFx4V7yvomTplFSBq6MBc1E. Part three of this documentary covers nonviolent direction actions and sit ins and the lunch counters of Woolworth Stores and national chain stores by college students and the clergy.&nbsp; The sit ins were led by John Lewis, Diane Nash and Angela Butler.&nbsp; The three and more than 80 protestors were arrested for the sit ins and local store lunch counters.&nbsp; The movement of sit ins spread across the country and the presidential campaign of the 1960s of John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon.</p>
<p>American Experience. &ldquo;Freedom Riders: The Student Leader.&rdquo; Mar 1, 2011.&nbsp; Accessed June 20, 2020. YouTube Video, 4:44. https://youtu.be/T2p5zvQlQ0k. This video is about Diane Nash, a student a Fisk University who began to lead sit ins in Tennessee.&nbsp; The major movement occurred after her meeting with Nashville&rsquo;s mayor about the human rights of all individuals.&nbsp; Nash was also a coordinator of freedom rides.&nbsp; John Lewis and Julian Bond are also interviewed.</p>
<p>American Experience Films. &ldquo;Freedom Summer Chapter 1.&rdquo; Jun 18, 2014. Accessed July 20, 2020. YouTube Video, 8:58.&nbsp; https://youtu.be/fx_5B0MVeqk. The video follows the disappearance and eventual discovery of the three civil rights workers (Andrew Goodman, Rita and Mickey Schwerner) as part of the Freedom Riders with the Mississippi Freedom Project, registering others to vote.</p>
<p>Amsel, Amanda. City Beat. &ldquo;Growing Up Under Apartheid&hellip;Daughter of famed archbishop comes to town.&rdquo; <em>City Beat (Cincinnati, Ohio)</em> March 9, 2011, https://www.citybeat.com/news/article/13012319/growing-up-under-apartheid</p>
<p>Black History in Two Minutes. &ldquo;Ella Baker - 'The Mother of the Civil Rights Movement.&rdquo; March 13, 2020.&nbsp; Accessed July 21, 2020. YouTube Video, 3:01. https://youtu.be/McneFCdHUn0</p>
<p>BlackPast. Momodu, Samuel &ldquo;Nashville sit-ins (1960).&rdquo; August 3, 2016 https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/nashville-sit-ins-1960.</p>
<p>Britannica Kids. &ldquo;Helen Suzman.&rdquo; https://kids.britannica.com/kids/article/Helen-Suzman/602271</p>
<p>The Conversation. &ldquo;Mandela&rsquo;s lawyer Bram Fischer: a man who paid the ultimate price.&rdquo; May 7, 2019.&nbsp; Accessed July 5, 2020.&nbsp; https://theconversation.com/mandelas-lawyer-bram-fischer-a-man-who-paid-the-ultimate-price-116436</p>
<p>CNN. &ldquo;SNCC's legacy: A civil rights history.&rdquo; YouTube Video, 5:56. Aug 27, 2010. https://youtu.be/QZE0a5-p9pg This video allows students to look at protests by college students who began the sit-ins, which in turn sparked participation in the civil rights movement.</p>
<p>Critical Past. &ldquo;Civilians protest against government laws and apartheid policies in South Africa.&rdquo;&nbsp; July 5, 2014. YouTube Video, 1:01.&nbsp; https://youtu.be/CLeHWppWGDg This quick clip covers original news footage of the Sharpeville Massacre in South Africa.</p>
<p>CueTube. "Ruth First: 117 Days." July 3, 2016. Accessed June 3, 2020. YouTube Video, 3:02. https://youtu.be/5Xu1x2wOEIk. This video clip provides viewers with a brief look into 117 days of imprisonment that Ruth First spent in prison. The adaptation is based on First's novel released in 1956. First, a white, female activist was held for interrogation by the South African&rsquo;s apartheid system&rsquo;s 90-day clause, which meant that you could be detained without probable cause.</p>
<p>Democracy Now!. &ldquo;Polaroid &amp; Apartheid: Inside the Beginnings of the Boycott, Divestment Movement Against South Africa.&rdquo; December 13, 2013. Accessed June 5, 2020. YouTube Video, 16:42. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nXVSdqnCl5k. This source allows you to see the direct impact of Caroline Hunter who influenced change in South Africa by forcing her company to look at its practices. African Americans working at Polaroid in Massachusetts created a boycott of the company's practices which began a divestment movement at their company against Apartheid in the 1970s</p>
<p>Duke Human Rights Center. &ldquo;The Pauli Murray Project.&rdquo; https://paulimurrayproject.org/. This site contains the timeline of Pauline Murray&rsquo;s life as well as important papers related to her life work as an activist and lawyer.</p>
<p>Harvard University Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. &ldquo;Rediscovering Pauli Murray,&rdquo; May 19, 2017.&nbsp; Accessed June 1, 2020. YouTube Video, 1:13:05.&nbsp; https://youtu.be/KVpfudHHsVI. This helpful video for teachers only is a panel discussion about Pauline Murray&rsquo;s life.&nbsp; The Schlesinger Library holds the Papers of Pauli Murray, who died in 1985.&nbsp; The collection includes audio interviews, correspondence, legal briefs, speeches, etc.</p>
<p>Hiaasen, Rob. &ldquo;Leon's story For years, custodian Leon Tillage told Park School students his heart-rending story of growing up in the segregated South. Now, his tales have become an acclaimed children's story -- and a lesson in the vagaries of memory.&rdquo; The Baltimore Sun. (Baltimore, Maryland) November 23, 1997 Accessed July 19, 2020. https://www.baltimoresun.com/news/bs-xpm-1997-11-23-1997327157-story.html</p>
<p>History.com editors. &ldquo;Apartheid.&rdquo; The History Channel. &nbsp;OCT 7, 2010. Updated March 3, 2020.&nbsp; Accessed June 7, 2020. https://www.history.com/topics/africa/apartheid. This video takes a look at the restrictions of Apartheid through the experiences of Nelson Mandela</p>
<p>The History Channel. &ldquo;Miracle Rising South Africa.&rdquo;&nbsp; April 17, 2013. Video, 1:32. https://youtu.be/IKDrRdfvUg8.</p>
<p>Home Box Office. Kundhardt Film Foundation. &ldquo;Diane Nash Full Interview - King in the Wilderness.&rdquo; August 1, 2018.&nbsp; Accessed June 21,2020. YouTube Video, 1:10:02. https://youtu.be/qYaGKmsCVjc. The work of Diane Nash, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Civil Rights Movement after the death of three little girls in the church bombing in Alabama.</p>
<p>Lowell Milken Center. &ldquo;Jane Crow: The Little Known Story of Pauli Murray.&rdquo; September 15, 2017. Accessed Jun 15,2020. YouTube Video, 11:45. https://youtu.be/Rxt0tbsWQfU. The story of Pauline &ldquo;Pauli&rdquo; Murray&rsquo;s life and work in the Civil Rights Movement.</p>
<p>Mamie Till Mobley Foundation. &ldquo;The Untold Story of EMMETT LUIS TILL (Documentary 2005).&rdquo;&nbsp; Nov 20, 2012. Accessed March 20, 2020. YouTube Video, 1:08:18. https://youtu.be/bvijYSJtkQk. This is the story of Emmett Till, a youth from Chicago, who went to visit with family in Mississippi and was taken from his uncle&rsquo;s home and killed by white men. Documentary shows the life and culture of black Americans living in the south during the Jim Crow Era.&nbsp; This video, for mature middle school audiences, makes comparisons to Apartheid in South Africa.</p>
<p>Minnesota Experience Twin Cities Public Television. &ldquo;Jim Crow of the North - Full-Length Documentary.&rdquo; Feb 25, 2019.&nbsp; Accessed July 10, 2020. YouTube Video, 57:36. https://youtu.be/XWQfDbbQv9E. This video talks about the practice of denying Madison Jackson, a pullman porter with a law degree who bought land in Prospect Park Minneapolis in an all-white community.&nbsp; This video tells the struggle of the black family who refused to move in 1909.&nbsp; There was a race war &ndash; the white community held many meetings telling the family and another black family of William Simpson that they would forcibly remove them. The practice of racial covenants to use real estate agreements or private contracts and racial restrictions or agreements hidden in deeds to keep black families out of white communities.</p>
<p>Mississippi Public Broadcasting. &ldquo;Fannie Lou Hamer: Stand Up.&rdquo; October 5, 2017. Accessed June 5, 2020. YouTube Video, 26:46. https://youtu.be/CxTReRmH2jA. This documentary covers the attempt of black southerners to vote in early 1960&rsquo;s and the life of Fannie Lou Hamer with interviews of Hamer, her daughter, Civil Rights Leader Charles Cobb and others.&nbsp; Her work with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and running for congress under the New Mississippi Democratic Party is also covered.</p>
<p>Mississippi Public Broadcasting.&nbsp; &ldquo;1964: The Fight for a Right.&rdquo;&nbsp; Oct 4, 2018.&nbsp; Accessed July 17, 2020. YouTube Video, 56:46. https://youtu.be/ZOX36uYgMys. In depth video on Jim Crow laws after slavery.</p>
<p>Nodjimbadem, Katie. "A Look Back at South Africa Under Apartheid, Twenty-Five Years After Its Repeal." Smithsonian.com. October 15, 2015. Accessed June 05, 2020. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/what-did-apartheid-south-africa-look-180956945/. While Apartheid legally came to an end on October 15, 1990, many inequities remain today. Many of the traces of Apartheid have impacted the country's balance of land ownership -- meaning the black South Africans own less land than whites in their country.</p>
<p>Palm Pictures. &ldquo;Mandela: Son of Africa, Father of a Nation: Full Documentary.&rdquo;&nbsp; April 15, 2016.&nbsp; Accessed June 20,2020. https://youtu.be/0_eYnCrh6gU. This documentary, nominated for an Oscar Award in 1996, is about Nelson Mandela.</p>
<p>PBS. &ldquo;Independent Lens: Have You Heard From Johannesburg Part 4 The Bottom Line.&rdquo; Jan 15, 2012.&nbsp; Accessed July 20, 2020. https://youtu.be/DpcdmLLor8M. Part of a series on the divestment process of many companies from South Africa. For full movie information see the Independent Television Service, which is funded by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting</p>
<p>PBS News Hour. &ldquo;A ruthless defender of apartheid now seeks forgiveness.&rdquo; Feb 17, 2016. Accessed July 20, 2020. https://youtu.be/ttL8P3NK4zY. Former Minister of Law and Order during Apartheid, Adriaan Vlok, changes his beliefs and now helps black South Africans more than 30 years after the end of Apartheid.</p>
<p>Schulz,&nbsp; Kathryn. The New Yorker. &ldquo;The Many Lives of Pauli Murray: She was an architect of the civil-rights struggle&mdash;and the women&rsquo;s movement. Why haven&rsquo;t you heard of her?.&rdquo; <em>The New Yorker Magazine. (New York, New York)</em> April 17, 2017.&nbsp; Accessed July 20, 2020&nbsp; https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/04/17/the-many-lives-of-pauli-murray</p>
<p>Smith, Candace. Pitt, Byron. &ldquo;Inside the all-white 'Apartheid town' of Orania, South Africa.&rdquo;&nbsp; <em>ABC News (New York, New York)</em>&nbsp; April 11, 2019.&nbsp; Accessed May 20, 2020&nbsp; https://abcnews.go.com/International/inside-white-apartheid-town-orania-south-africa/story?id=62337338</p>
<p>South African History Online. <em>Miriam Makeba, UN, 1963 South African Apartheid</em>. Miriam Makeba, UN, 1963 South African Apartheid. March 17, 2015. Accessed June 03, 2020. https://youtu.be/Pc0GqSHiXH0. This short video clip show Miriam Makeba addressing the United Nations in 1963 about the injustice of Apartheid--her mother who was a domestic worker even faced jail time when Miriam, known as "Mother Africa" was only 18 days old for selling homemade beer. Selling home-brewed beer was illegal for black Africans during that time and Miriam ended spending several months in jail as an infant alongside her incarcerated mother.</p>
<p>South Carolina ETV. &ldquo;Septima Clark.&rdquo;&nbsp; November 14, 2014. Accessed June 10, 2020. YouTube Video, 5:38. https://youtu.be/yd5kP1fGdDE. The life and work of educator Septima Clark is discussed.&nbsp; She was also called the &lsquo;&lsquo;Mother of the Civil Rights Movement.&rdquo;&nbsp;</p>
<p>Swarns, Rachel L. "Tsakane Journal; Apartheid Still Burdens A Girl Who Didn't Fit."&nbsp;<em>Tsakane Journal / New York Times</em>&nbsp;(New York), June 10, 2000, sec. A. Accessed July 23, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2000/06/10/world/tsakane-journal-apartheid-still-burdens-a-girl-who-didn-t-fit.html. This article is about the life of Sandra Laing who was born to white Afrikaners, but she was born black. Although tested as being the true daughter of white parents, this article talks about the racism she experienced within her family and South Africa.</p>
<p>Thurow, Aishling and Lemberger, Anna. &rdquo;7 women civil rights leaders you need to know.&rdquo; February 24, 2015.&nbsp; Accessed June 7, 2020. <em>ONE Campaign ONE Action</em> (Washington, DC) https://www.one.org/us/blog/7-kick-ass-women-civil-rights-leaders-you-need-to-know/. This article focuses on several little-known leaders or influencers of the Civil Rights Movement.</p>
<p>Townsend, Jacinda. &ldquo;How the Green Book Helped African-American Tourists Navigate a Segregated Nation: Listing hotels, restaurants and other businesses open to African-Americans, the guide was invaluable for Jim-Crow era travelers.&rdquo; Smithsonian.com. April 2016. Accessed July10, 2020.&nbsp; https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smithsonian-institution/history-green-book-african-american-travelers-180958506/</p>
<p>University of London School of Advanced Study. First, Ruth. &ldquo;Ruth First Papers.&rdquo; https://www.ruthfirstpapers.org.uk/</p>
<p>Walker, Eugene. &ldquo;Ella Baker Speaks! My Life in the Movement&hellip;Oral History Interview Part 1.&rdquo; May 18, 2015. Access June 10, 2020. YouTube Video, 1:01:37.&nbsp; https://youtu.be/aHmXeFVvk4c. Eugene Walker interviews Ella Baker on September 4, 1974. This is part 1 of a series of three during which Ms. Baker, who was known at the driving force behind much of the work with Dr. Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement.</p>
<p>Winsor, Morgan. &ldquo;Apartheid and Jim Crow are really no different': Why George Floyd's death reverberated in Africa.&rdquo;&nbsp; Good Morning America. July 12, 2020.&nbsp; Accessed July 20, 2020.&nbsp; https://www.yahoo.com/gma/apartheid-jim-crow-really-no-different-why-george-130100755--abc-news-topstories.html. This article is a good source comparing recent events involving George Floyd, with Apartheid and Jim Crow.</p>
</main>
