---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 21.02.06"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2021/2/21.02.06.x.html"
unitTitle: "The Legacy of Francophonie in Post-Colonial Africa"
unitAuthor: "Valbona Karanxha"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "" 
---
<main>
        <p><span>This unit is part of the anti-racist curriculum writing seminar at Yale New-Haven Teacher Institute.</span></p>
<p><span>I start the research with a pedagogical explanation of second language acquisition and the focus of language teachers. This approach sheds light on the fact that, as language teachers, we focus mainly on the linguistic component that does not have much to do with the teaching of social justice emphasizing that culturally responsive pedagogy is lacking from our curriculum. Hence, it is a systemic problem &ndash; not only in the inner city schools &ndash; but everywhere.&nbsp; After retaking the topic of social justice in the subject that I teach - French - I decided to explore a little further. First, I focused on the Francophonie as part of France's colonial legacy in Africa. Secondly, I give a panoramic view of the colonization of Africa through the assimilation theory and the physical - yet non-cultural inclusion of Black Africa in the French political and administrative system. Thirdly, I discuss the ruling ideology and the ideology of the oppressed, which will be the biggest promotor of post-colonial French African art, literature, music, etc. Lastly, I have included three activities for teachers to reflect on and find useful meaning for their lessons of French language and culture.</span></p>
<p>(Developed for French levels 3-4; recommended for French levels 3-4)</p>
</main>
