---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 21.02.10"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2021/2/21.02.10.x.html"
unitTitle: "Invisible Incidences in America-The Great Migration and Destruction of Thriving Black Communities"
unitAuthor: "Felicia Fountain"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "" 
---
<main>
        <p>Social Studies is the study of the interactions of people, events, geography, economics, and society.&nbsp; What happens when the training and content that many history and social studies teachers have used contains deep fault line fissures and misrepresentations?&nbsp; In this four to six-week curriculum unit designed for 8<sup>th</sup> graders, students<span> will explore and research events in history from 1910 to the 1970s.&nbsp; Many of these events are rarely mentioned in most Social Studies textbooks, curricula, or resources. </span></p>
<p>Essential questions for this unit are:&nbsp;</p>
<ul>
<li>How can social studies investigate a history of racism?</li>
<li>What is anti-racist education?</li>
<li>How can educators and students work to remix our current social studies curriculum to emphasize anti-racist learning?</li>
<li>How are people affected by marginalization and erasure?</li>
<li>How does a dominant narrative develop?</li>
</ul>
<p>Students will engage in viewing and researching videos and artifacts about<span> thriving black communities that developed in the early 20th century amidst the violence of Jim Crow.&nbsp; The dominant narrative about US History from the end of Reconstruction to the mid-20th century has often portrayed Black people as hopeless and destitute.&nbsp; In reality, many Black people left the south, moved north or Midwest to establish flourishing communities.&nbsp; Black communities in Tulsa, Knoxville and Chicago were making great progress in the first two decades of the 20<sup>th</sup> century. But during the Red Summer of 1919, the aforementioned communities and others were burned down by white mobs and never rebuilt.&nbsp; One community was burned down and filled in with water, later becoming a lake.&nbsp; These mobs murdered blacks, decimated their townships, and then attempted to conceal this history, often erasing it entirely from history books.</span></p>
<p>Students&rsquo; culminating project is research, documentation, and presentation of their findings through a student-led Community Action Event.</p>
<p>(Developed for Social Studies, grade 8; recommended for American History, African American Studies, and Black and LatinX Studies, grades 9-12, and U.S. History, grade 8)</p>
</main>
