---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 21.01.10"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2021/1/21.01.10.x.html"
unitTitle: "Contemporary Black Art: Race as a Metalanguage for Intersectionality"
unitAuthor: "Eleanor Scranton"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "" 
---
<main>
        <p>This unit is designed for middle-school students in the Content Area of Visual Art focusing on Identity Politics, Voice, Critical Race Theory, Activism and Social Justice. The unit is accessible for modification and inclusion of all grade levels. Anti-Bias and Anti-Racist training interwoven with Social-Emotional Identification and Self-Care gives students skills and guidance to navigate humanity in the twenty-first century. The objective of the unit is for students to gain critical awareness of the self in the past, present, and future. Students will be able to project and assist in their vocality and aspirations for the self and the collective. Students will explore critical race theory and identity politics in relation to the self and their visual art practice. Through research and application, students will consolidate, frame, and expand their visual thinking to be full of self-determination and self-respect. Through critical analysis, students will activate their critical conscience and create a voice that is written, spoken, and established through visual representation. This visual art practice will give students a voice for change and act as a facilitator to sustain all paths of liberation.</p>
<p>(Developed for Studio Art, grades 5-8; recommended for Art, grades 5-12)</p>
</main>
