---
layout: "unit"
title: "Guide Entry to 20.01.09"
path: "/curriculum/guides/2020/1/20.01.09.x.html"
unitTitle: "Not So Pretty in Pink: An Analysis of Woman in the Economy, 2020"
unitAuthor: "William L. McKinney"
keywords: ""
recommendedFor: "" 
---
<main>
        <p>This unit introduces students to the economics of gender inequality. The unit utilizes a series of interactive simulations and discussions to gauge students&rsquo; tacit understandings of productivity, equity, and fairness, as well as providing male students an entry point to better understand the female perspective. All activities are mapped to AP units so the unit aligns with the AP Microeconomics standards and sequencing.</p>
<p>This unit begins by examining how social revolutions driven by comparative advantage gave rise to gender inequality. It then examines the relationship between marriage and game theory. The bulk of this unit examines labor markets and the wage gap. Finally, the unit examines gender-biased laws that show how inefficient government regulation leads to greater social inefficiency.</p>
<p>The essential questions of the unit are</p>
<ol>
<li><span>What social inefficiencies naturally arise in American product and labor markets?</span></li>
<li><span>What role does the government play in correcting market failures?</span></li>
<li><span>How can society and the government change current legislature and policy to promote gender equality in the product and labor markets?</span></li>
</ol>
<p>(Developed for AP Microeconomics, grades 10-12; recommended for AP Microeconomics, grades 11-12)</p>
</main>
