---
layout: "unit"
title: "21.02.11: Adding Race Consciousness to the Slavery Curriculum"
path: "/curriculum/units/2021/2/21.02.11.x.html"
unitTitle: "Adding Race Consciousness to the Slavery Curriculum"
unitAuthor: "Dena Vaillancourt"
---
<main>
	<h2><strong>Introduction</strong></h2>
<p>I teach 8th Grade Social Studies at an interdistrict magnet school in New Haven, Connecticut which services primarily African American and Latinx students. Our district utilizes a chronological method when creating curriculum guided by recommended content outlined in the C3 Framework. The C3 Framework for Social Studies Standards guides educators in creating curriculum that is inquiry based and helps prepare students for College, Career and Civic Life. 8th Grade Social Studies in our district covers the time periods of American history from colonial America through Reconstruction.</p>
<p>One of the units I teach is on the Antebellum time period where I include the study of slavery. I have evolved this unit over time, but before creating the following unit, I still relied heavily on the textbook <em>History Alive: The United States Through Industrialism</em>. When getting to the topic of slavery, the essential question I usually posed comes from this textbook and is as follows: &ldquo;<em>How did African Americans face slavery and discrimination in the mid-1800s?&rdquo;</em> (1). The textbook, though limited, does provide readers with some important concepts regarding slavery. Most notably, it explains that enslaved and free African Americans did not just accept their enslavement and discrimination, but fought back in various ways. This idea has always been empowering to my students and provides them with an anti-racist view that African Americans were not just accepting of their enslavement and discrimination but were active in resistance to end both.&nbsp;</p>
<p>However, over time I began to realize that my unit and the resources I chose did not do enough to answer all the questions students had about slavery. One glaring omission is they were not learning the direct ties between slavery and the growth of racism and white supremacy. As Kate Shuster points out, &ldquo;Most textbooks do a poor job of teaching about the relationship between slavery and racism&rdquo; (2). This omission left students without the answers they needed to understand the truth about America&rsquo;s past to understand their present.</p>
<p>In this unit I aim to help students see this connection, exploring the ways elite white Americans justified the enslavement of Africans and how some of these same ideas continue to perpetuate systemic racism in our country today. Ultimately, the goal of this unit is to have students gain a more holistic understanding of the connection between slavery and the growth of racism and white supremacy in the United States and the continued legacies today, so that students can investigate ways to become change agents to combat systemic racism. This unit is not intended to cover all of the important concepts regarding slavery, but be used as a supplemental resource to address this missing piece from many traditional textbooks/curriculums.&nbsp;</p>
<h2><strong>Rationale</strong></h2>
<h3>Challenging the &lsquo;Neutrality&rsquo; of History</h3>
<p>Similar to the field of law, many argue that history is neutral, and that the teaching of it should be too. At least that is what many critics of Critical Race Theory have been discussing, as this debate has exploded in the past few months. I would argue the opposite. History is not neutral, neither is the teaching of it. What and how we choose to teach history matters. When talking specially about American history, &ldquo;... the debates have focused on the balance among patriotism and American exceptionalism, on one hand, and the country&rsquo;s history of exclusion and violence towards Indigenous people and the enslavement of African Americans on the other&mdash;between its ideals and its practices&rdquo; (3). If we just teach part of the perspective, if we ignore the negative, we are not teaching the entire history and that is problematic for many reasons.</p>
<p>When teaching the history of slavery in America, not teaching its connection to race is limiting. It&rsquo;s as if saying race and racism have no connection to slavery. This idea is known as &ldquo;colorblindness.&rdquo; The problem with this is, even though a social construct, race is a real factor that played an enormous role in slavery in America and it continues to play in role in American society today. As Larry Ferlazzo elaborates, &ldquo;Colorblind&rdquo; ideologies are problematic because they fail to consider racism, past or present, as determining factors associated with disparities&rdquo; (4). If our aim as educators is to teach students how to be prepared for their futures, including their role in civic life, understanding the entire history of our country is crucial.</p>
<p>Colorblindness is also not effective and provides an unsafe environment for students. As Milton Reynolds articulated from his own educational experience, &ldquo;The psychological toll of navigating the evasion and denials of colorblindness extinguished my desire for learning and obliterated the relevance of schooling&rdquo; (5). As educators, we want students to be engaged. We want students to think critically and be problem solvers. We want students to feel safe. To do this, teaching from an anti-racist as opposed to a colorblind approach is critical. As Milton Reynolds illustrates, &ldquo;Study after study, however, shows that this colorblind approach does not work, that it leads students to learn little and to respond to challenges with evasion, denial, and anxiety&rdquo; (6). There is a better way and it starts with recognizing that race and racism have shaped the history of our nation.</p>
<h3>Rethinking the Dominant Narrative of Slavery</h3>
<p>&ldquo;When I was in school and first really learning about racism, I was taught the popular origin story. I was taught that ignorant and racist people had instituted racist policies. But when I learned the motives behind the production of racist ideas, it became obvious that this folktale, though sensible, was not true&rdquo; (7). -Ibram X. Kendi</p>
<p>The dominant story we tell of the country helps perpetuate existing systems of power, and as a result, continued injustice. The quote above by Kendi articulates the dominant narrative that is often taught regarding racism and slavery. This dominant narrative is problematic in that it leaves out the whole truth. As Phia S. Salter discusses, if we do not empower students with the truths or our nation&rsquo;s history, and how those truths still operate today, nothing can be healed and remedied (8). In this case, the truth that racist ideas were created as a way to justify the institution of slavery. The want of this institution, stemming from greed and the hunger for power. As Toni Morrison illustrates, &ldquo;Racism was never, ever the issue. Profit and money always was. And all of those quotations from William Byrd to Benjamin Franklin to Andrew Jackson to the New York Tribune, the threat was always jobs, land, or money&rdquo; (9).</p>
<p>An alternative approach to teaching the dominant narrative is to offer a counter-narrative as a way to disrupt the dominant narrative. What does this mean? It does not mean throwing away everything you have created and compiled over the years. It does mean utilizing critical thinking skills as well as adding new resources to help construct a more accurate and comprehensive history. This unit offers students a counter-narrative by providing a deeper exploration into the history of racism and white supremacy that is directly linked to slavery in America. This unit was created for an 8th grade Social Studies class focusing on the study of U.S. history. However, it could be easily adapted to another course on U.S. history or integrated within units in other disciplines.&nbsp;</p>
<h2><strong>Content Objectives</strong></h2>
<p>&ldquo;Although we teach them that slavery happened, we fail to provide the detail or historical context they need to make sense of its origin, evolution, demise and legacy&rdquo; (10).</p>
<p>Within this unit, students will address some of the shortcomings listed above. They will start by being introduced to the history of slavery of people of African descent in the United States, starting with its origin in 1619. Students will then explore the evolution of slavery sparked by Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion in 1676 and the system&rsquo;s connections to the growth of racism and white supremacy. This will include learning about many justifications for slavery by studying the history of racist ideas from 1415 to the mid-1700s. Lastly, students will investigate the connection between slavery and systemic racism in the United States today and they ways that people are taking a stand against it. The goals of this unit are to:</p>
<ul>
<li>Understand the origins and evolution of slavery in America, including the many justifications.</li>
<li>Examine the connection between slavery in America and the growth of racism and white supremacy.</li>
<li>Examine the connections between slavery and systemic racism in the United States today.</li>
<li>Investigate approaches to dismantle systemic racism in the United States today.</li>
</ul>
<p>Unit Essential Questions:</p>
<ul>
<li>To what extent does learning about the origins, evolution and legacies of slavery and racism help you to understand your world today?</li>
<li>How can you be an agent of change to combat legacies of slavery and racism?</li>
</ul>
<p>Unit Guiding Questions:</p>
<ul>
<li>What did the beginning of slavery look like in America regarding the possibilities for enslaved people?</li>
<li>How and why did the laws regarding slavery in America evolve over time?</li>
<li>How and why did Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion change the laws regarding slavery in America and add to the creation of white supremacy?</li>
<li>How were racist ideas used to justify the enslavement of Africans in America?</li>
<li>What are legacies of slavery and racism in America?</li>
<li>What does resistance to legacies of slavery and racism in America look like today?</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Teaching Strategies/Classroom Activities Overview</strong></h2>
<p>This unit will be broken down into three parts which will include both teaching strategies and classroom activities. The three parts are as follows: 1) Slavery in America: The Beginning 2) Slavery in America: Evolution &amp; Justifications and 3) Slavery in America: Legacies, Resistance &amp; Hope. For each part, I will include at least one suggested classroom activity. Each classroom activity will include the specific topic being addressed, some background content, rationale for why teach the content covered in the activity, the specific guiding question(s) that the activity will help to answer as well as a warm up, activity details, and a closing/reflection. The unit also includes a suggested hook as well as a final project to address the unit&rsquo;s essential questions.</p>
<h2><strong>Unit Hook </strong></h2>
<p>As a way to engage your students, I recommend starting this unit with an activity that lets students decide if they think various statements are myths or facts about the history of slavery and racism in America. I recommend using Pear Deck or another tech tool that allows students to record their answers and then have them shared as a collective anonymously with the class. Statements can be posed one at a time and students can be given time to respond. Then, reveal the class data to the class and then give students the opportunity to comment on their selection as wanted. Continue this process for the remaining statements. At the end of this activity, let students know that throughout this unit, they will be investigating the topics posed in these statements and they will revisit them at the end to see if they still agree with their original viewpoints. I recommend using the following statements:</p>
<ul>
<li>Slavery has always been tied directly to race and racism.</li>
<li>Enslaved Africans in North America were never able to buy their own freedom.</li>
<li>Poor whites never allied themselves with poor blacks and enslaved peoples to get more freedom, rights and status.</li>
<li>Enslavers justified enslaving Africans by using stories found in the Bible.</li>
<li>Mass incarceration is a legacy of American slavery.</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Part 1 - Slavery in America: The Beginning</strong></h2>
<h3>Classroom Activity 1</h3>
<p>Topic- The History of Slavery&rsquo;s Beginning in America</p>
<p>Background- Slavery has existed throughout history, it is not unique to America. However, the evolution of slavery in America was not straightforward. The first enslaved Africans arrived in colonial America in 1619. As the 1619 project explains, &ldquo;that was when a ship arrived at Point Comfort in the British colony of Virginia, bearing a cargo of 20 to 30 enslaved Africans&rdquo; (11). The enslaved Africans existed side-by-side with indentured servants and the laws regarding both systems were ever changing. At times during the onset of slavery in America, both enslaved peoples and indentured servants were able to acquire their freedom and have other opportunities that accompanied freedom. At this time, status and power in colonial America came primarily from your religion and wealth, not based on one&rsquo;s race.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Rationale- Teaching the origins of slavery in America is necessary to help students understand that the institution of slavery was not static and was not always connected solely to race. This foundation will help students understand in future lessons how racism and the white supremacy were a result of slavery.</p>
<p>Guiding Questions- What did the beginning of slavery look like in America regarding the possibilities for enslaved people? How and why did the laws regarding slavery in America evolve over time?</p>
<ul>
<li>Warm Up: Ask students what they already know or think they know about racism and slavery. Give students time to brainstorm their ideas individually and then have students share out to make a collection of the class&rsquo;s thinking.</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Activity:
<ul>
<li>First, students will read the text &ldquo;We and They in Colonial America&rdquo; from the book <em>Holocaust and Human Behavior (</em>link available in the Resources section below), a Facing History and Ourselves publication. This text describes the complex beginning of slavery in America and presents the argument that religion and wealth, not race, dictated status and belonging in colonial America. Students will then be broken into small groups to answer the following questions:
<ul>
<li>According to the text, when did the bringing of Africans to work as enslaved peoples begin in America?</li>
<li>When these first Africans were brought to America, what most influenced status and belonging in Virginia?</li>
<li>What do the stories of Anthony Johnson and Elizabeth Key illustrate about the possibilities for enslaved people in America prior to the 1660s?</li>
<li>How did laws and traditions regarding enslaved people begin to change in the 1660s? Give at least two examples from the text.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Second, students will make a simple timeline using the information from the questions to process their learning on the topic and guiding questions. They will include the years 1619 and the decade of the 1660s. For each of these time periods, students will describe in at least two sentences, what the beginning of slavery looked like in America regarding possibilities for enslaved people and the laws regarding them. This will help students start to build a picture of how slavery originated and how it started to evolve in America.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Closing/Reflection: Lastly, students will be asked to reflect on their new learning by responding to their choice of 3 or more of the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How did this new learning make you feel? Explain your answer.</li>
<li>What are your thoughts about this new learning?</li>
<li>What surprised you? What was surprising about it?</li>
<li>What did you find the most interesting? Why?</li>
<li>How did this new learning challenge or confirm your understanding of slavery and/or racism?</li>
<li>What are you wondering after this new learning?</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>This can be done using a variety of teaching strategies. Below are a couple of potential options. More details about each option can be found in the &ldquo;Teaching Strategies&rdquo; section of Facing History and Ourselves (link available in the Resources section below).
<ul>
<li>Option 1: Journals
<ul>
<li>Using journals allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied individually. It can help them process and deepen their understanding of what is being learned. Journals can provide a safe place for students to share their thinking and can provide opportunities for relationship building between teacher and student through reading and providing comments.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Option 2: Graffiti Boards
<ul>
<li>Using graffiti boards allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied as a collective. This allows students to hear each other&rsquo;s ideas and can help in building a classroom community.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<h2><strong>Part 2 - Slavery in America: Evolution &amp; Justifications</strong></h2>
<h3>Classroom Activity 2</h3>
<p>Topic- Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion and the Evolution of Slavery</p>
<p>Background- Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion is cited as one of the leading causes of the creation of laws restricting the mobility of enslaved people&rsquo;s legal status in the United States. During Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion, black and white servants alongside slaves rebelled against the colonial elite and government, and caused severe damage. Those in power became fearful of this type of alliance, and created laws that gave poor whites more power and took away rights from blacks as a way to hopefully avoid this type of alliance in the future so that those in power could maintain their dominance.</p>
<p>Rationale- This lesson helps students to see the connections between slavery and the growth of race, racism and white supremacy in the United States. This is not always the norm when teaching slavery. As Kate Shuster supports, &ldquo;We rarely connect slavery to the ideology that grew up to sustain and protect it: white supremacy. Slavery required white supremacy to persist. In fact, the American ideology of white supremacy, along with accompanying racist dogma, developed precisely to justify the perpetuation of slavery&rdquo; (12). If this connection is not taught it leaves out a crucial truth about our history that still deeply impacts the realities in our society today.</p>
<p>Guiding Question- How and why did Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion change the laws regarding slavery in America and add to the creation of white supremacy?</p>
<ul>
<li>Warm Up: Provide students with a copy of the 1905 painting by Howard Pyle of Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion (link available in the Resources section below). Ask students what they notice and what they wonder. Give them time to think and write about it individually and then have them share their thinking with the class.</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Activity:
<ul>
<li>First, students will read the text &ldquo;Inventing Black and White&rdquo; from the book <em>Holocaust and Human Behavior </em>(link available in the Resources section below), a Facing History and Ourselves publication. This text describes the role that Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion played in creating stricter laws regarding the possibilities for enslaved people as well as creating a distinction in laws between white people and black people. Students will then be broken into small groups to answer the following questions:
<ul>
<li>What did Bacon and Berkeley disagree about? What were the two differing perspectives?</li>
<li>What did Bacon do when Berkeley did not do what he wanted him to do? Who helped Bacon and why?</li>
<li>What were Virginia&rsquo;s wealthy planters afraid of after the rebellion?</li>
<li>What did Virginia lawmakers do after Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion in reaction to this fear? Describe the impact on people of African descent and people of European descent.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Second, students will add on to their timeline from Classroom Activity 1 using the information from the questions to process their learning on the topic and guiding questions. They will add the year 1676. For this new addition, students will describe in at least two sentences, what the evolution of slavery looked like in America regarding possibilities for enslaved people and the laws regarding them after Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion. This will help students start to build a picture of how slavery continued to evolve.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Closing/Reflection: Lastly, students will be asked to reflect on their new learning by responding to their choice of 3 or more of the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How did this new learning make you feel? Explain your answer.</li>
<li>What are your thoughts about this new learning?</li>
<li>What surprised you? What was surprising about it?</li>
<li>What did you find the most interesting? Why?</li>
<li>How did this new learning challenge or confirm your understanding of slavery and/or racism?</li>
<li>What are you wondering after this new learning?</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>This can be done using a variety of teaching strategies. Below are a couple of potential options. More details about each option can be found in the &ldquo;Teaching Strategies&rdquo; section of Facing History and Ourselves (link available in the Resources section below).
<ul>
<li>Option 1: Journals
<ul>
<li>Using journals allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied individually. It can help them process and deepen their understanding of what is being learned. Journals can provide a safe place for students to share their thinking and can provide opportunities for relationship building between teacher and student through reading and providing comments.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Option 2: Graffiti Boards
<ul>
<li>Using graffiti boards allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied as a collective. This allows students to hear each other&rsquo;s ideas and can help in building a classroom community.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<h3>Classroom Activity 3&nbsp;</h3>
<p>Topic- Justifications of Slavery</p>
<p>Background- The sources of racist ideas have many origins and evolved over time. Racist ideas have been used as justification for the enslavement of Africans and include justification such as biological factors and religious justification, just to name a few. This activity will utilize the text <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You </em>by Jason Reynolds and Ibram X. Kendi. This text was specifically written for young adults, being adapted from the original text <em>Stamped from the Beginning: The Definitive History of Racist Ideas in America</em>, also written by Ibram X. Kendi. This book argues that the idea of race was constructed to create and maintain power. This idea has been perpetuated throughout systems and helps explain why things are the way they are today. It also explains how racist ideas have been easily created and spread but also provides hope as to how they can be discredited.</p>
<p>Rationale- This activity utilizes <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You </em>to help students understand the history behind racist ideas and how they were used to justify the institution of slavery. This helps address and discredit the dominant narrative that exists about why African Americans were enslaved in America. The sections of the book that will be used in this activity, covers the time period of 1415 to the mid 1700s. This section was chosen to help students understand the origin and evolution of racist ideas and how they were used to justify slavery in America from its inception and on.</p>
<p>Guiding Question- How were racist ideas used to justify the enslavement of Africans in America?</p>
<ul>
<li>Warm Up: Pose the following question to students, give them time to think and write about it individually and then have them share their thinking with the class. <em>Where does racism come from?</em></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Activity:
<ul>
<li>First, students will be broken up into groups to learn about and then share their findings on various justifications for slavery. Before this happens, the class will read Chapter 1: The Story of the first Racist in <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You </em>by Jason Reynolds and Ibrim X. Kendi. While reading students will focus on how the enslavement of Africans was justified according to the text. They will record their findings. Students will then repeat this same process for their assigned additional topic. Once they have recorded their findings, they will share their learning with the class and the class will take notes. This will allow all students to have a complete introduction to the history of the evolution of racist ideas that were used to justify slavery in America. The additional topics are as follows:
<ul>
<li>Chapter 2: Puritan Power in <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em></li>
<li>Chapter 3: A Different Adam in <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em></li>
<li>Chapter 4: A Racist Wunderkind in <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em></li>
<li>Chapter 5: Proof in the Poetry in <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em></li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Second, students will process their learning by writing a well-constructed paragraph answering the guiding question: How were racist ideas used to justify the enslavement of Africans in America? Students will be asked to use at least three examples from the text to support their answer.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Closing/Reflection: Lastly, students will be asked to reflect on their new learning by responding to their choice of 3 or more of the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How did this new learning make you feel? Explain your answer.</li>
<li>What are your thoughts about this new learning?</li>
<li>What surprised you? What was surprising about it?</li>
<li>What did you find the most interesting? Why?</li>
<li>How did this new learning challenge or confirm your understanding of slavery and/or racism?</li>
<li>What are you wondering after this new learning?</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>This can be done using a variety of teaching strategies. Below are a couple of potential options. More details about each option can be found in the &ldquo;Teaching Strategies&rdquo; section of Facing History and Ourselves (link available in the Resources section below).
<ul>
<li>Option 1: Journals
<ul>
<li>Using journals allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied individually. It can help them process and deepen their understanding of what is being learned. Journals can provide a safe place for students to share their thinking and can provide opportunities for relationship building between teacher and student through reading and providing comments.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Option 2: Graffiti Boards
<ul>
<li>Using graffiti boards allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied as a collective. This allows students to hear each other&rsquo;s ideas and can help in building a classroom community.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<p></p>
<h2><strong>Part 3 - Legacies of Slavery in America: Resistance &amp; Hope </strong>&nbsp;</h2>
<h3>Classroom Activity 4</h3>
<p>Topic- Various Legacies of Slavery &amp; Racism in America/Forms of Resistance Today</p>
<p>Background- Racist ideas have been perpetuated by those in power to maintain their power which results in legacies of slavery such as redlining, police brutality and mass incarceration. As Critical Race Theory helps us understand, &ldquo;...race is a social construct, and that racism is not merely the product of individual bias or prejudice, but also something embedded in legal systems and policies&rdquo; (13). Today, resistance to these legacies is prevalent in society through a plethora of movements such as Black Lives Matter.</p>
<p>&ldquo;The challenge throughout has been to tell what I view as the truth about racism without causing disabling despair. For some of us who bear the burdens of racial subordination, any truth - no matter how dire - is uplifting&rdquo; (14). -Derrick Bell</p>
<p>Rationale- This activity provides students with opportunities to learn about the various legacies of slavery and racism that exist today as well as how those legacies are trying to be dismantled. Students need to see connections between what they are learning and their realities. They need ways to understand the world around them. Understanding the history and truth behind injustice is the first step to taking action against it.</p>
<p>Guiding Questions- What are legacies of slavery and racism in America? What does resistance to legacies of slavery and racism in America look like today?</p>
<ul>
<li>Warm Up: Pose the following question to students, give them time to think and write about it individually and then have them share their thinking with the class. <em>What is a legacy?</em></li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Activity: Students will be broken up into groups to learn about and then share their findings on various legacies of slavery and racism in America today as well as forms of resistance against them. Before this happens, the class will explore the link between slavery and mass incarceration, a legacy of slavery. They will do this by utilizing a Newsela article called &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Why American prisons owe their cruelty to slavery&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below) as well as a video titled &ldquo;Slavery to Mass Incarceration&rdquo; by the Equal Justice Initiative (link available in the Resources section below). Students will then answer the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How is mass incarceration a legacy of slavery and racism in America? Describe the connection.</li>
<li>What does resistance to this legacy look like today? Describe at least one example.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Students will repeat this same process for their chosen additional topic. Those topics come from the Legacies of American Slavery Project by the Council of Independent Colleges (link available in the Resources section below) and are as follows. They are accompanied by possible resources; however additional research may need to be done to help students locate resistance to these legacies.
<ul>
<li>Commemoration and Memory - Newsela article &ldquo;Georgetown University will recruit students descended from its slaves&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Economic Disparities - Newsela article &ldquo;The 1619 Project: How America's vast racial wealth gap grew: by plunder&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Contested Citizenship - Newsela article &ldquo;House passes bill to restore key parts of Voting Rights Act&rdquo; (found in the Resources for Teachers and Students section below)</li>
<li>Cultural Creativity - Newsela article &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Forged in bondage, black music is the sound of freedom&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Racial Violence and Resistance - Newsela article &ldquo;Ferguson's police and courts targeted African-Americans, report says&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Race, Place, and Migration - Newsela article &ldquo;Redlining prevents minority families from becoming homeowners&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Environmental Justice - Newsela article &ldquo;Racist housing policies have created some oppressively hot neighborhoods&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
<li>Race, Health, and Medicine - Newsela article &ldquo;The 1619 Project: How false beliefs in physical racial difference still live in medicine today&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below) and/or Newsela article &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Why doesn't America have universal health care? One word: race&rdquo; (link available in the Resources section below)</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<ul>
<li>Closing/Reflection: Lastly, students will be asked to reflect on their new learning by responding to their choice of 3 or more of the following questions:
<ul>
<li>How did this new learning make you feel? Explain your answer.</li>
<li>What are your thoughts about this new learning?</li>
<li>What surprised you? What was surprising about it?</li>
<li>What did you find the most interesting? Why?</li>
<li>How did this new learning challenge or confirm your understanding of slavery and/or racism?</li>
<li>What are you wondering after this new learning?</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>This can be done using a variety of teaching strategies. Below are a couple of potential options. More details about each option can be found in the &ldquo;Teaching Strategies&rdquo; section of Facing History and Ourselves (link available in the Resources section below).
<ul>
<li>Option 1: Journals
<ul>
<li>Using journals allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied individually. It can help them process and deepen their understanding of what is being learned. Journals can provide a safe place for students to share their thinking and can provide opportunities for relationship building between teacher and student through reading and providing comments.</li>
</ul>
</li>
<li>Option 2: Graffiti Boards
<ul>
<li>Using graffiti boards allows students to discuss their thoughts and feelings about what is being studied as a collective. This allows students to hear each other&rsquo;s ideas and can help in building a classroom community.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<p></p>
<h2><strong>Unit Final Project</strong>&nbsp;</h2>
<p>Rationale: Ultimately the goal of this unit is to have students take some form of action to address their newly acquired knowledge. This is crucial as Linda Christensen points out, &ldquo;...students need to act on their new knowledge. If we intend to create citizens of the world, as most school districts claim in their mission statements, then we need to teach students how to use their knowledge to create change&rdquo; (15). This directly relates to the fourth dimension of the C3 Framework, taking informed action.</p>
<p>Essential Questions: To what extent does learning about the origins, evolution and legacies of slavery and racism help you to understand your world today? How can you be an agent of change to combat legacies of slavery and racism?</p>
<p>Activity- For this unit&rsquo;s final project, students will address both of the unit&rsquo;s essential questions. Students will start by using their selected legacy of American slavery topic from Classroom Activity 4. They will create a display board or virtual presentation explaining how their selected topic is a legacy of slavery and racism in America? They will also share what resistance to this legacy looks like today? Students will then research local resistance groups/organizations that are working to combat these legacies in their own communities and the ways that people can join/connect with these groups/organizations. Lastly, students will write a personal reflection explaining to what extent learning about the origins, evolution and legacies of slavery helped them to understand their world today. Students will use these displays in our school&rsquo;s annual &ldquo;Celebration of Learning&rdquo; event. This event showcases the work of students who share their learning with other students, members of the school community, and community members who are invited to attend this event.&nbsp;</p>
<h2><strong>Resources</strong></h2>
<p>Equal Justice Initiative, &ldquo;Slavery to Mass Incarceration&rdquo; https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4e_djVSag4</p>
<p>Facing History and Ourselves, &ldquo;Bacon&rsquo;s Rebellion&rdquo; (1905 painting by Howard Pyle) https://www.facinghistory.org/resource-library/image/bacons-rebellion?backlink=https://www.facinghistory.org/holocaust-and-human-behavior/chapter-2/inventing-black-and-white</p>
<p>Facing History and Ourselves, &ldquo;Inventing Black and White&rdquo; https://www.facinghistory.org/holocaust-and-human-behavior/chapter-2/inventing-black-and-white</p>
<p>Facing History and Ourselves, &ldquo;Teaching Strategies&rdquo; https://www.facinghistory.org/resource-library/teaching-strategies</p>
<p>Facing History and Ourselves, &ldquo;We and They in Colonial America&rdquo; https://www.facinghistory.org/sites/default/files/publications/Holocaust_Human_Behavior_revised_edition_2.pdf</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;Ferguson's police and courts targeted African-Americans, report says&rdquo;&nbsp; https://newsela.com/read/ferguson-report/id/7824/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;Georgetown University will recruit students descended from its slaves&rdquo;&nbsp; https://newsela.com/read/georgetown-slavery-admission/id/21338/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;House passes bill to restore key parts of Voting Rights Act&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/house-restores-voting-rights/id/2000004213/?collection_id=2000000398</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;Racist housing policies have created some oppressively hot neighborhoods&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/racist-housing-policies/id/2001013661/?collection_id=2000000398</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;Redlining prevents minority families from becoming homeowners&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/lib-redlining-housing-discrimination/id/30150/?collection_id=2000000398</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Forged in bondage, black music is the sound of freedom&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/nyt-1619-music-black-culture-appropriation/id/2000000229/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;The 1619 Project: How America's vast racial wealth gap grew: by plunder&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/nyt-1619-americans-racial-wealth-gap-history/id/2000000223/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;The 1619 Project: How false beliefs in physical racial difference still live in medicine today&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/nyt-1619-racial-differences-doctors/id/2000000228/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Why American prisons owe their cruelty to slavery&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/nyt-1619-american-prison-history-slavery/id/2000000195/</p>
<p>Newsela, &ldquo;The 1619 Project: Why doesn't America have universal health care? One word: race&rdquo; https://newsela.com/read/nyt-1619-health-care-race/id/2000000198/&nbsp;</p>
<p>The Council of Independent Colleges, &ldquo;Legacy Themes&rdquo; https://www.cic.edu/p/legacies-of-slavery/Documents/CIC-Legacies-of-American-Slavery-Themes.pdf</p>
<h2><strong>Appendix on Implementing District Standards</strong></h2>
<p>Throughout this unit, activities cover the specified Common Core State Standards as well as the C3 Framework for Social Studies Standards listed below. Our district utilizes both of these sets of standards for the teaching of Social Studies.</p>
<p>Common Core English Language Arts Standards - History/Social Studies - Grade 6-8</p>
<p>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.1&nbsp;</p>
<p>Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of primary and secondary sources.</p>
<p>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.2&nbsp;</p>
<p>Determine the central ideas or information of a primary or secondary source; provide an accurate summary of the source distinct from prior knowledge or opinions.</p>
<p>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.7&nbsp;</p>
<p>Integrate visual information (e.g., in charts, graphs, photographs, videos, or maps) with other information in print and digital texts.</p>
<p>CCSS.ELA-LITERACY.RH.6-8.10&nbsp;</p>
<p>By the end of grade 8, read and comprehend history/social studies texts in the grades 6-8 text complexity band independently and proficiently.</p>
<p>C3 Framework for Social Studies Standards</p>
<p>HIST 8.1 Analyze connections among events and developments in historical contexts.</p>
<p>INQ 6.8.11 Construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequences, examples, and details with relevant information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and weaknesses of the explanations.</p>
<p>INQ 6&ndash;8.16 Assess their individual and collective capacities to take action to address local, regional, and global problems, taking into account a range of possible levels of power, strategies, and potential outcomes.</p>
<h2><strong>Bibliography</strong></h2>
<p>Bell, Derrick. <em>Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Permanence of Racism</em>. New York: Basic Books, 2018.&nbsp;</p>
<p>Blight, David. &ldquo;What Is a Legacy of American Slavery?&rdquo; In <em>Legacies of American Slavery</em>. Washington, DC: The Council of Independent Colleges. https://www.cic.edu/p/legacies-of-slavery/Documents/CIC-Legacies-of-American-Slavery-Themes.pdf.</p>
<p>Christensen, Linda. <em>Teaching For Joy and Justice: Re-Imagining the Language Arts Classroom.</em> Milwaukee: Rethinking Schools, Ltd., 2009.</p>
<p>Ferlazzo, Larry. &ldquo;Educators Must Disrupt &lsquo;Colorblind Ideologies.&rsquo;&rdquo; Education Week. February 4, 2020. https://www.edweek.org/teaching-learning/opinion-educators-must-disrupt-colorblind-ideologies/2020/02.</p>
<p>Hart, Diane, and Bert Bower. <em>History Alive!: The United States through Industrialism</em>. Palo Alto, CA: Teachers Curriculum Institute, 2011.</p>
<p>Morrison, Toni. &ldquo;A Humanist View.&rdquo; Speech, Portland State University, May 30, 1975. Mackenzian. https://www.mackenzian.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Transcript_PortlandState_TMorrison.pdf.</p>
<p>Reynolds, Jason &amp; Kendi, Ibram X. <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em>. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2020.</p>
<p>Reynolds, Milton. "Shifting Frames: Pedagogical Interventions in Colorblind Teaching Practice.&rdquo; In <em>Seeing Race Again: Countering Colorblindness Across the Disciplines</em>, edited by Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw, Luke Charles Harris, Daniel Martinez HoSang, and George Lipsitz, 352-373. Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2019.</p>
<p>Salter, Phia S. &ldquo;Learning History, Facing Reality: How Knowledge Increases Awareness of Systemic Racism.&rdquo; American Educator 45, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 26-31.</p>
<p>Sawchuk, Stephen. &ldquo;What Is Critical Race Theory, and Why Is It Under Attack?&rdquo; Education Week. May 18, 2021. https://www.edweek.org/leadership/what-is-critical-race-theory-and-why-is-it-under-attack/2021/05.</p>
<p>Shuster, Kate. "Teaching Hard History." Southern Poverty Law Center. January 31, 2018. https://www.splcenter.org/20180131/teaching-hard-history.</p>
<p>"The 1619 Project." The New York Times. August 14, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html.</p>
<h2><strong>Notes</strong></h2>
<ol>
<li>Diane Hart and Bert Bower, <em>History Alive!: The United States through Industrialism</em> (Palo Alto, CA: Teachers Curriculum Institute, 2011), 375.</li>
<li>Kate Shuster, "Teaching Hard History," Southern Poverty Law Center, January 31, 2018, https://www.splcenter.org/20180131/teaching-hard-history.</li>
<li>Stephen Sawchuk, &ldquo;What Is Critical Race Theory, and Why Is It Under Attack?&rdquo; Education Week, May 18, 2021, https://www.edweek.org/leadership/what-is-critical-race-theory-and-why-is-it-under-attack/2021/05.</li>
<li>Larry Ferlazzo, &ldquo;Educators Must Disrupt &lsquo;Colorblind Ideologies,&rsquo;&rdquo; Education Week, February 4, 2020, https://www.edweek.org/teaching-learning/opinion-educators-must-disrupt-colorblind-ideologies/2020/02.</li>
<li>Milton Reynolds, "Shifting Frames: Pedagogical Interventions in Colorblind Teaching Practice,&rdquo; in <em>Seeing Race Again: Countering Colorblindness Across the Disciplines</em>, ed. Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw, Luke Charles Harris, Daniel Martinez HoSang, and George Lipsitz (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2019), 353.</li>
<li>Ibid.</li>
<li>Jason Reynolds &amp; Ibram X. Kendi, <em>Stamped: Racism, Antiracism, and You</em> (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2020), xiii-xiv.</li>
<li>Phia S. Salter, &ldquo;Learning History, Facing Reality: How Knowledge Increases Awareness of Systemic Racism,&rdquo; <em>American Educator</em> 45, no. 1 (Spring 2021): 27.</li>
<li>Toni Morrison, &ldquo;A Humanist View&rdquo; (speech, Portland State University, May 30, 1975), Mackenzian, https://www.mackenzian.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/Transcript_PortlandState_TMorrison.pdf.</li>
<li>Kate Shuster, "Teaching Hard History," Southern Poverty Law Center, January 31, 2018, https://www.splcenter.org/20180131/teaching-hard-history.</li>
<li>"The 1619 Project," The New York Times, August 14, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html.</li>
<li>Kate Shuster, "Teaching Hard History," Southern Poverty Law Center, January 31, 2018, https://www.splcenter.org/20180131/teaching-hard-history.</li>
<li>Stephen Sawchuk, &ldquo;What Is Critical Race Theory, and Why Is It Under Attack?&rdquo; Education Week, May 18, 2021, https://www.edweek.org/leadership/what-is-critical-race-theory-and-why-is-it-under-attack/2021/05.</li>
<li>Derrick Bell, <em>Faces at the Bottom of the Well: The Permanence of Racism</em> (New York: Basic Books, 2018).</li>
<li>Linda Christensen, <em>Teaching For Joy and Justice: Re-Imagining the Language Arts Classroom</em> (Milwaukee: Rethinking Schools, Ltd., 2009), 17.</li>
</ol>
</main>
